---
title: "Vector Spaces"
date: 2018-06-25T11:03:48+08:00
author: "Jim Zenn"
volumes: ["MATH 115A"]
layout: "note"
issue: 1.2


---

A vector space must have a null object.

<!--more-->

<div class="latex-macros">
  {{< raw >}}
    $\newcommand{\R}{\mathbb{R}}$
    $\newcommand{\Q}{\mathbb{Q}}$
    $\newcommand{\Z}{\mathbb{Z}}$
    $\newcommand{\N}{\mathbb{N}}$
    $\newcommand{\P}{\mathbb{P}}$
    $\newcommand{\set}[1]{\{#1\}}$
    $\newcommand{\emptyset}{\varnothing}$
    $\newcommand{\union}{\cup}$
    $\newcommand{\intercept}{\cap}$
    $\newcommand{\abs}[1]{|#1|}$
    $\newcommand{\t#1}{\text}[1]$
  {{< /raw >}}
</div>

{{% definition name="Space" %}}
In mathematics, a space is a set with some added structure.
{{% /definition %}}

{{% definition name="Vector Space" %}}
A **vector space** (or **linear space**) $V$ over a field $F$ consists of a set where two operations (**vector addition** and **scalar multiplication**) are defined and satisfies the following properties:

1. $\forall x, y \in V, x + y = y + x$
<br> (commutativity of addition)
2. $\forall x, y, z \in V, (x + y) + z = x + (y + z)$
<br> (associativity of addition)
3. $\exists 0 \in V$ s.t. $\forall x \in V, x + 0 = x$
<br> (existence of identity element for addition, i.e null vector)
4. $\forall x \in V, \exists y \in V $ s.t. $x + y = 0$
<br> (existence of inversion for addition)
5. $\forall x \in V, 1x=x$
<br> (existence of identity element for multiplication)
6. $\forall a,b \in F, \forall x \in V, (ab)x=a(bx)$
7. $\forall a \in F, \forall x, y\in V, a(x+y)=ax+ay$
8. $\forall a,b \in F, \forall x \in V, (a+b)x = ax+ bx$

$x+y$ is called the **sum** of $x$ and $y$;
$ax$ the **product** of $a$ and $x$.

Elements of the field $F$ are called **scalars**;<br>
elements of the vector space $V$ are called **vectors**.

{{% /definition %}}

{{% example name="$\R^n/\R$" %}}

Prove that $\R^n / \R$ is a vector space. Notice that $\R^\infty$ is not included in this case, $\R^\infty$ is the set of **sequences**.

Proof scratch:

1.$\vec{v}+\vec{u}=\vec{u}+\vec{v}$

2.$(\vec{u}+\vec{v})+\vec{w} = \vec{u}+(\vec{v}+\vec{w}) $

3.$\exists \vec{0},\vec{u}+\vec{0}=\vec{u}$

4.$1\in \R, 1 \cdot \vec{u}=\vec{u}$

5.$a, b \in \R, a(b\vec{u})= (ab)\vec{u}$

6.$a,b \in \R, (a+b)\vec{u}=a\vec{u}+b\vec{u}$

7.$a\in \R, \vec{u},\vec{v}, a(\vec{u} + \vec{v})=a\vec{u} + a\vec{v}$

8.$\vec{u},-\vec{u}, \vec{u} + \vec{v}=\vec{0}$

{{% /example %}}

{{% example name="Arbitrary Polynomial" %}}

$\mathbb{P}\_n(x)=$set of all polynomials of degree$\leq n$ with real coefficient and in variable $x$.

**vector addition**:

With $f(x), g(x) \in \mathbb{P}\_n(x)$

$f(x) = a\_0+ a\_1x+ ... + a\_nx^n,$

$g(x) = b\_0 +b\_1x+ ... + b\_nx^n.$

$f(x)+g(x):=(a\_0+b\_0)+(a\_1 +b\_1)x+...+(a\_n+b\_n)x^n$

**scalar multiplication**:

$c\in F = \R, cf(x) := ca\_0 + (ca\_1)x + ... + (ca\_n)x^n$

we claim $\mathbb{P}\_n(x)$ is a vector space on $\R$ with respect to these two operations, because all the properties stands with defined vector addition and scalar multiplicaiton.

{{% /example %}}

{{% remarks name="what is the degree of zero polynomial: $f(x)=0$ ?" %}}

{{% definition name="Degree of Polynomial" %}}

The highest term's index with <u>non-zero</u> coefficient.

{{% /definition %}}

What is the degree of zero polynomial?<br>
**undefined** (some book states that the degree of zero polynomial is $-1$)

what can you fill in the boxes below so that the equation stands?
$0=\square x^\square$

{{% /remarks %}}

{{% example name="Real Sequence (!IMPORTANT)" %}}

$\R^\infty=\set{a\_1, a\_2, a\_3,..|a\_i \in \R}=\set{(a\_n)\_{n\geq1}, a\_n\in \R}$<br>
$(a\_n) + (b\_n) = (a\_n+b\_n)$<br>
$\lambda \in \R, \lambda (a\_n) = (\lambda a\_n)$

$\R^\infty/\R$ is a vector space.

{{% /example %}}

{{% example name="Real Matrix (!IMPORTANT)" %}}

$M\_{m\times n}(\R)$ = set of all $m \times n$ matrices with real entries.<br>
$A, B \in M\_{m \times n}(\R), A=(a\_{ij})\_{m\times n}, B=(b\_{ij})\_{m\times n}$<br>
$A+B=(a\_{ij}+b\_{ij})\_{m\times n}$<br>
$\lambda \in \R,\lambda A =(\lambda a\_{ij})\_{m\times n}$

$M\_{m\times n}(\R)/\R$ is a vector space.

Why matrix multiplication works that way?

{{% /example %}}


{{% example name="\"Bad Mutiplication\"" %}}

$\R^2 / \R$<br>
$(a\_1, a\_2)+(b\_1, b\_2) = (a\_1+b\_1, a\_2+b\_2)$<br>
$\lambda (a\_1, a\_2) = (\lambda a\_1, -a\_2)$<br>

$1(a\_1, a\_2) \neq (a\_1, a\_2)$
(VS 5 does not stand)

**NOT A VECTOR SPACE**

{{% /example %}}

{{% example %}}
$\R^4 / \R$<br>
$(a\_1, a\_2)+(b\_1, b\_2) = (a\_1+b\_1+1, a\_2+b\_2)$<br>
$\lambda (a\_1, a\_2) = (\lambda a\_1, \lambda a\_2)$

$\begin{align\*}\lambda ((a\_1, a\_2) + (b\_1, b\_2)) &= \lambda(a\_1 + b\_1 + 1, a\_2 + b\_2) \br &= (\lambda a\_1 + \lambda b\_1 + \lambda, \lambda a\_1 + \lambda b\_1)\end{align*}$
$\lambda(a\_1, a\_2) + \lambda(b\_1, b\_2) = (\lambda a\_1 + \lambda b\_1 + 1, \lambda b\_1 + \lambda b\_2)$

(VS 7 does not stand)

**NOT A VECTOR SPACE**

{{% /example %}}

{{% example %}}
$V=\set{a}, F=\R$<br>
$a+a=a$<br>
$\lambda a = a$

**Oui! C'est un vector space!**

Same as $V=\set{0}, F=\R$. Isomorphism.

$\P\_n(x) = \set{\text{polynomial of degree} \leq n}$ is a vector space over $\R$.

$\P(x) = \set{\text{all polynomials of every possible degree}}$ is a vector space over $\R$.

Infinity is not a valid degree. As we discussed before, degree must be a number, but infinity is not.

$P(x)$ is also a vector space

{{% /example %}}
