---
title: "Subspaces"
date: 2018-06-27T11:03:48+08:00
menuTitle: "Linear Algebra"
volumes: ["1"]
layout: "note"
issue: 3


---

<p class="hide">
  Subspaces.
</p>

<!--more-->

<div class="latex-macros">
  {{< raw >}}
    $\newcommand{\br}{\\}$

    $\newcommand{\R}{\mathbb{R}}$
    $\newcommand{\Q}{\mathbb{Q}}$
    $\newcommand{\Z}{\mathbb{Z}}$
    $\newcommand{\N}{\mathbb{N}}$
    $\newcommand{\C}{\mathbb{C}}$
    $\newcommand{\P}{\mathbb{P}}$
    $\newcommand{\F}{\mathbb{F}}$
    $\newcommand{\L}{\mathcal{L}}$
    $\newcommand{\spa}[1]{\text{span}(#1)}$
    $\newcommand{\set}[1]{\{#1\}}$
    $\newcommand{\emptyset}{\varnothing}$
    $\newcommand{\otherwise}{\text{ otherwise }}$
    $\newcommand{\if}{\text{ if }}$
    $\newcommand{\union}{\cup}$
    $\newcommand{\intercept}{\cap}$
    $\newcommand{\abs}[1]{| #1 |}$
    $\newcommand{\pare}[1]{\left\(#1\right\)}$
    $\newcommand{\t}[1]{\text{ #1 }}$
    $\newcommand{\head}{\text H}$
    $\newcommand{\tail}{\text T}$
    $\newcommand{\inv}[1]{{#1}^{-1}}$
    $\newcommand{\nullity}[1]{\text{nullity}(#1)}$
    $\newcommand{\rank}[1]{\text{rank}(#1)}$
    $\newcommand{\oto}{\text{ one-to-one }}$
    $\newcommand{\ot}{\text{ onto }}$


    $\newcommand{\Vcw}[2]{\begin{pmatrix} #1 \br #2 \end{pmatrix}}$
    $\newcommand{\Vce}[3]{\begin{pmatrix} #1 \br #2 \br #3 \end{pmatrix}}$
    $\newcommand{\Vcr}[4]{\begin{pmatrix} #1 \br #2 \br #3 \br #4 \end{pmatrix}}$
    $\newcommand{\Vct}[5]{\begin{pmatrix} #1 \br #2 \br #3 \br #4 \br #5 \end{pmatrix}}$
    $\newcommand{\Vcy}[6]{\begin{pmatrix} #1 \br #2 \br #3 \br #4 \br #5 \br #6 \end{pmatrix}}$
    $\newcommand{\Vcu}[7]{\begin{pmatrix} #1 \br #2 \br #3 \br #4 \br #5 \br #6 \br #7 \end{pmatrix}}$

    $\newcommand{\Mqw}[2]{\begin{bmatrix} #1 & #2 \end{bmatrix}}$
    $\newcommand{\Mqe}[3]{\begin{bmatrix} #1 & #2 & #3 \end{bmatrix}}$
    $\newcommand{\Mqr}[4]{\begin{bmatrix} #1 & #2 & #3 & #4 \end{bmatrix}}$
    $\newcommand{\Mqt}[5]{\begin{bmatrix} #1 & #2 & #3 & #4 & #5 \end{bmatrix}}$

    $\newcommand{\Mwq}[2]{\begin{bmatrix} #1 \br #2 \end{bmatrix}}$
    $\newcommand{\Meq}[3]{\begin{bmatrix} #1 \br #2 \br #3 \end{bmatrix}}$
    $\newcommand{\Mrq}[4]{\begin{bmatrix} #1 \br #2 \br #3 \br #4 \end{bmatrix}}$
    $\newcommand{\Mtq}[5]{\begin{bmatrix} #1 \br #2 \br #3 \br #4 \br #5 \end{bmatrix}}$

    $\newcommand{\Mqw}[2]{\begin{bmatrix} #1 & #2 \end{bmatrix}}$
    $\newcommand{\Mwq}[2]{\begin{bmatrix} #1 \br #2 \end{bmatrix}}$
    $\newcommand{\Mww}[4]{\begin{bmatrix} #1 & #2 \br #3 & #4 \end{bmatrix}}$
    $\newcommand{\Mqe}[3]{\begin{bmatrix} #1 & #2 & #3 \end{bmatrix}}$
    $\newcommand{\Meq}[3]{\begin{bmatrix} #1 \br #2 \br #3 \end{bmatrix}}$
    $\newcommand{\Mwe}[6]{\begin{bmatrix} #1 & #2 & #3\br #4 & #5 & #6 \end{bmatrix}}$
    $\newcommand{\Mew}[6]{\begin{bmatrix} #1 & #2 \br #3 & #4 \br #5 & #6 \end{bmatrix}}$
    $\newcommand{\Mee}[9]{\begin{bmatrix} #1 & #2 & #3 \br #4 & #5 & #6 \br #7 & #8 & #9 \end{bmatrix}}$
  {{< /raw >}}
</div>

{{% definition name="Subspaces" %}}

A subset $W$ of a vector space $V$ over a Field $F$ is called a **subspace** if $W$ is a vector space over $F$ is a vector space, denoted by $W \leq V$.

{{% /definition %}}

{{% note name="" %}}

In any vector space $V, V$ itself and $\set{0}$ are subspaces. The latter is called the **zero subspace** of $V$.

{{% /note %}}

{{% theorem name="Properties of subspaces" index="1.3" %}}

Additionally, a subset $W$ of a vector space $V$ is a subspace of $V$ if and only if the following three properties hold.

1. $W$ has a zero vector.
2. $x + y \in W$ whenever $x\in W$ and $y \in W$. ($W$ is **closed under addition**)
3. $cx \in W$ whenever $c \in F$ and $x \in W$. ($W$ is **closed under scalar multiplication**)

{{% proof name="" %}}

<u>Assume that $W$ is a subspace.</u>

This implies from the definition of subspace that $W$ itself is a vector space over $F$. then for all three of the properties are satisfiled.

<br>

<u>Assume that the three properties holds for $W$.</u> We need to proof that $W$ is a subspace of $V$, i.e. itself is a vector space.

1. $w\_1 + w\_2 = w\_2 + w\_1, \forall w\_1, w\_2 \in W \subseteq V$
2. $(w\_1 + w\_2) + w\_3 = w\_1 + (w\_2 + w\_3）, \forall w\_1, w\_2, w\_3 \in W \subseteq V$
3. The third property.
4. let $c= -1 \in F$， $\forall x \in W \subseteq V, x + (-1)x = (1-1) x = 0$
5. $1w=w, \forall w \in W \subseteq V$
6. $\forall a,b \in F, \forall x \in W \subseteq V, (ab)x=a(bx)$
7. $\forall a \in F, \forall x, y\in W \subseteq V, a(x+y)=ax+ay$
8. $\forall a,b \in F, \forall x \in W \subseteq V, (a+b)x = ax+ bx$


{{% /proof %}}

{{% /theorem %}}

{{% example name="$\R^2/\R=$ XY-plane" %}}

{{% /example %}}

{{% example name="X-axis" %}}

W=$\{(a,0)|a\in\R\}$

1. $(0,0)\in W$
2. $(a,0) + (b,0) = (a+b, 0) \in W, V$
3. $\lambda \in \R, \lambda(a, 0) = (\lambda a, 0) \in W$

$\therefore W$ is a subspace of $\R^2$

Any straight line in $\R^2$ that passes through the origin is a subspace of $\R^2$


{{% /example %}}

{{% examples name="" %}}

$W = \set{A\in M\_{n\times n}(\R)|A^T=A}=$ Set of all symmetric matrices is a subspace.

Set of all diagnal matrices is a subspace.

Set of all invertible matrices is **NOT** a subspace.

Set of all upper triangular matrices is a subspace.

Set of all lower triangular matrices is a subspace.

$W = \set{A\in M\_{n\times n}|A^2=A}$ is **NOT** a subspace.

$W=\set{A\in M\_{n\times n}\(R\)| \tr{A}=0\}$ is a subspace.

$\R^n$, hyperplanes that passes through the origin $a\_1x\_1+a\_2x\_2+...+a\_nx\_n=0$ are subspaces.

{{% /examples %}}

{{% example name="$\R^5$" %}}
$\R^5, W =\set{(x\_1, x\_2,x\_3,x\_4,x\_5)\in \R^5 | x\_1-x\_2+x\_5=0, 2x\_3+7x\_4=0}$. subspace.

1. $(0,0,0,0,0) \in W$, since <br>
$0- 0+0 =0$<br>
$2\cdot0+7\cdot0=0$

2. $(x\_1, x\_2,...,x\_5)\in W \implies x\_1-x\_2+x\_5=0  (1), 2x\_3+7x\_4=0   (2)$<br>
$(y\_1,y\_2,...,y\_5) \in W \implies  y\_1-y\_2+y\_5=0  (3), 2y\_3+7y\_4=0  (4)$<br>
$(x\_1+y\_1,x\_2+y\_2,...x\_5+,y\_5) \in W$<br>
$(1)+(3) = 0, (2)+(4) = 0$
3. trivial

{{% /example %}}

{{% theorem name="" index="1.4" %}}
The intersection of any number (uncountable is also included) of subspaces of $V$ is again a subspace of $V$.
{{% /theorem %}}

{{% remarks name="" %}}
Union of TWO subspaces may not be a subspace in general.

Union is a subspace if and only if one subspace is the subset of the other.
{{% /remarks %}}
