---
title: "Bases and Dimensions"
date: 2018-07-05T11:03:48+08:00
menuTitle: "Linear Algebra"
volumes: ["1"]
layout: "note"
issue: 6
---

<p class="hide">
  Basis, Dimensions of Vector Spaces.
</p>


<!--more-->

<div class="latex-macros">
  {{< raw >}}
    $\newcommand{\br}{\\}$

    $\newcommand{\R}{\mathbb{R}}$
    $\newcommand{\Q}{\mathbb{Q}}$
    $\newcommand{\Z}{\mathbb{Z}}$
    $\newcommand{\N}{\mathbb{N}}$
    $\newcommand{\C}{\mathbb{C}}$
    $\newcommand{\P}{\mathbb{P}}$
    $\newcommand{\F}{\mathbb{F}}$
    $\newcommand{\L}{\mathcal{L}}$
    $\newcommand{\spa}[1]{\text{span}(#1)}$
    $\newcommand{\set}[1]{\{#1\}}$
    $\newcommand{\emptyset}{\varnothing}$
    $\newcommand{\otherwise}{\text{ otherwise }}$
    $\newcommand{\if}{\text{ if }}$
    $\newcommand{\union}{\cup}$
    $\newcommand{\intercept}{\cap}$
    $\newcommand{\abs}[1]{| #1 |}$
    $\newcommand{\pare}[1]{\left\(#1\right\)}$
    $\newcommand{\t}[1]{\text{ #1 }}$
    $\newcommand{\head}{\text H}$
    $\newcommand{\tail}{\text T}$
    $\newcommand{\inv}[1]{{#1}^{-1}}$
    $\newcommand{\nullity}[1]{\text{nullity}(#1)}$
    $\newcommand{\rank}[1]{\text{rank}(#1)}$
    $\newcommand{\oto}{\text{ one-to-one }}$
    $\newcommand{\ot}{\text{ onto }}$


    $\newcommand{\Vcw}[2]{\begin{pmatrix} #1 \br #2 \end{pmatrix}}$
    $\newcommand{\Vce}[3]{\begin{pmatrix} #1 \br #2 \br #3 \end{pmatrix}}$
    $\newcommand{\Vcr}[4]{\begin{pmatrix} #1 \br #2 \br #3 \br #4 \end{pmatrix}}$
    $\newcommand{\Vct}[5]{\begin{pmatrix} #1 \br #2 \br #3 \br #4 \br #5 \end{pmatrix}}$
    $\newcommand{\Vcy}[6]{\begin{pmatrix} #1 \br #2 \br #3 \br #4 \br #5 \br #6 \end{pmatrix}}$
    $\newcommand{\Vcu}[7]{\begin{pmatrix} #1 \br #2 \br #3 \br #4 \br #5 \br #6 \br #7 \end{pmatrix}}$

    $\newcommand{\Mqw}[2]{\begin{bmatrix} #1 & #2 \end{bmatrix}}$
    $\newcommand{\Mqe}[3]{\begin{bmatrix} #1 & #2 & #3 \end{bmatrix}}$
    $\newcommand{\Mqr}[4]{\begin{bmatrix} #1 & #2 & #3 & #4 \end{bmatrix}}$
    $\newcommand{\Mqt}[5]{\begin{bmatrix} #1 & #2 & #3 & #4 & #5 \end{bmatrix}}$

    $\newcommand{\Mwq}[2]{\begin{bmatrix} #1 \br #2 \end{bmatrix}}$
    $\newcommand{\Meq}[3]{\begin{bmatrix} #1 \br #2 \br #3 \end{bmatrix}}$
    $\newcommand{\Mrq}[4]{\begin{bmatrix} #1 \br #2 \br #3 \br #4 \end{bmatrix}}$
    $\newcommand{\Mtq}[5]{\begin{bmatrix} #1 \br #2 \br #3 \br #4 \br #5 \end{bmatrix}}$

    $\newcommand{\Mqw}[2]{\begin{bmatrix} #1 & #2 \end{bmatrix}}$
    $\newcommand{\Mwq}[2]{\begin{bmatrix} #1 \br #2 \end{bmatrix}}$
    $\newcommand{\Mww}[4]{\begin{bmatrix} #1 & #2 \br #3 & #4 \end{bmatrix}}$
    $\newcommand{\Mqe}[3]{\begin{bmatrix} #1 & #2 & #3 \end{bmatrix}}$
    $\newcommand{\Meq}[3]{\begin{bmatrix} #1 \br #2 \br #3 \end{bmatrix}}$
    $\newcommand{\Mwe}[6]{\begin{bmatrix} #1 & #2 & #3\br #4 & #5 & #6 \end{bmatrix}}$
    $\newcommand{\Mew}[6]{\begin{bmatrix} #1 & #2 \br #3 & #4 \br #5 & #6 \end{bmatrix}}$
    $\newcommand{\Mee}[9]{\begin{bmatrix} #1 & #2 & #3 \br #4 & #5 & #6 \br #7 & #8 & #9 \end{bmatrix}}$
  {{< /raw >}}
</div>

{{% definition name="Basis" %}}

$V/F$, a subset $\beta\subseteq V$ is called a **basis** of $V$ if

1. $\beta$ generates $V$, i.e. $\spa{\beta}=V$.
2. $\beta$ is linearly independent.

{{% /definition %}}

{{% example name="" %}}
Prove that $\beta=\set{(1,0), (0,1)}$ is a basis of $\R^2$.

{{% proof name="" %}}

1. need to prove $\beta$ generates $V$.<br>
$\forall (a,b) \in \R^2,$<br>
$(a, b)=a(1,0)+b(0,1)$ i.e. $\spa{\beta}=\R^2$.

2. need to prove $\beta$ is linearly independent.<br>
$x(1,0) + y(0,1) = (0,0)$<br>
$(x,y) = (0,0)$<br>
$x = 0, y = 0$

$\therefore$ $\beta$ is a basis of $\R^2$.

{{% /proof %}}

{{% /example %}}

{{% example name="" %}}
$e\_1=(1,0,0,...)$,
$e\_2=(0,1,0, ...)$,
$e\_3=(0,0,1, ...)$, <br>
$e\_n=(0,0,...,1, 0, ...)$. <br>
Is $S= \set{e\_1, e\_2, e\_3, ...}$abasis of $\R^\infty$?

{{% proof name="" %}}

**No.** it is not.

Let $e = (1, 1, 1, 1, ...), e \in \R^\infty$. <br>

$e \notin \spa{S}$, but $e \in \R^\infty$.

$\spa{\beta} \neq R^\infty$ i.e. $\spa{\beta}$ cannot generate $\R^\infty$.

Hence, $\beta$ is not a basis of $\R$.

{{% /proof %}}

{{% remarks name="" %}}
  $R^\infty$ does have a basis, although we don't know what it is.<br>
  **Every vector space have a basis.**

{{% /remarks %}}


{{% /example %}}

{{% example name="$\R^n/\R$" %}}
$e\_1=(1,0,0,...)$,
$e\_2=(0,1,0, ...)$,
$e\_3=(0,0,1, ...)$, <br>
$e\_n=(0,0,...,1, ..., 0)$.<br>
$S= \set{e\_1, e\_2, e\_3, ..., e\_n}$ is a basis of $\R^n$.

{{% proof name="" %}}
1. need to prove that $S$ generates $\R^n$. <br>
$(a\_1, a\_2, ..., a\_{n}) \in \R^n$ <br>
$(a\_1, a\_2, ..., a\_{n}) = a\_1e\_1 + a\_2e\_2 + ... + a\_{n} e\_{n}$ <br>
$\spa{S} = R $ i.e. $S$ generates $\R^n$.

2. need to prove $S$ is linearly independent. <br>
$a\_1e\_1 + a\_2e\_2 + ... + a\_{n} e\_{n} = 0$ <br>
$(a\_1, a\_2, ..., a\_{n}) = 0$ <br>
$a\_i = 0,  i = 1, 2, ..., n $
$\therefore, S$ linearly independent.

{{% /proof %}}

{{% /example %}}

{{% example name="$\P\_n(X)/\R$" %}}
$\beta = \set{1, x, x^2, ..., x^n}$ is a basis of $P\_n(X)$ over $\R$.

{{% /example %}}

{{% example name="$\P(X)/\R$" %}}
Prove that $\beta = \set{1, x, x^2, ...}$ is a basis of $\P(x) / \R$.

1. need to prove that $\beta$ generates $\P(x) $. <br>
$a\_0 + a\_1x + a\_2x^2 + ... + a\_{n} x^{n} \in \P(x)$
$\spa{\beta} = \P(x) $

2. need to prove that $\beta$ is linearly independent. <br>
<small>To prove an infinite set is linearly independent, we only need to prove its every finite subset's only solution is the trivial representation.</small> <br>

{{% /example %}}

{{% remarks name="the basis of $\set{0}/F$" %}}
The empty set $\emptyset$ is the basis of $V=\set{0}/F$.

{{% proof index="" name="" %}}
1. need to prove that $\emptyset$ generates $\set{0}$. <br>
Trivial. It is defined that $\spa{\emptyset} = \set{0}$.
2. need to prove that $\emptyset $ is linearly independent. <br>
Trivial.

{{% /proof %}}



{{% /remarks %}}

{{% theorem name="uniqueness of linear combination with bases" index="1.8" %}}
$\beta \subseteq V$, <br>
$\beta$ is a basis of $V \iff $
$\forall v \in V, \exists v\_1, v\_2, ..., v\_n \in \beta$ and <u>unique</u> $a\_1, a\_2, ..., a\_n \in F$ s.t.
$$v = \sum^n\_{i=1}a\_iv\_i$$

{{% proof name="by contradiction" %}}
$\implies$

$\spa{\beta} = V$, since $\beta$ is a basis of $V$.

Assume that for $v\in V, \exists a\_1, a\_2, ..., a\_n, b\_1, b\_2, ..., b\_n$ s.t.

$$v = \sum\_{i=1}^na\_iv\_i= \sum\_{i=1}^nb\_iv\_i$$

then we have

$$\sum\_{i=1}^n(a\_i-b\_i)v\_i= 0$$

$\because \beta$ linearly independent $\therefore a\_i-b\_i = 0, \forall i = 1 ... n$.

$\therefore \forall i, a\_i=b\_i$, the coefficients are unique.

$\impliedby$

1. need to prove $\spa{\beta} = V$.<br>
Since $\forall v \in V, v \in \spa{\beta}, V\subseteq \spa{\beta}$.<br>
$\beta \subseteq V \implies \spa{\beta} \subseteq V$.<br>
$\therefore V = \spa{\beta}$.

2. need to prove $\beta$ is linearly independent.<br>
Choose $v = 0$, then
$\forall v\_1, v\_2, ..., v\_k (k \leq n)$, there exist unique $a\_1, a\_2, ..., a\_k$ s.t.<br>
$$a\_1v\_1 + a\_2v\_2 + ... + a\_kv\_k = 0$$<br>
then $a\_i$ must be all zero. Hence $\beta$ is linearly dependent.

$\therefore$ by definition, $\beta$ is a basis of $V$.

{{% /proof %}}
{{% /theorem %}}

{{% theorem name="Deletion Theorem" index="1.9" %}}
$V/F, S$ is a <u>finite</u> generating subset of $V$. Then $\exists T \subseteq S, T$ is a basis of $V$.

{{% proof name="" %}}
**case 1**:
If $S=\emptyset$ or $S= \set{0}$, then $\spa{S} = \set{0} = V.$

Then $\emptyset \subseteq S$ is the basis of $V = \set{0}, T = \emptyset.$

<br>

**case 2**:
If $S \neq \emptyset$ and $S \neq \set{0}$, then $\exists v\_1 \in S$, s.t. $v\_1 \neq 0, \set{v\_1}$ linearly independent.

Step 1: Is $\spa{{v\_1}} = V$?

If yes, then stop and set $T=\set{v\_1}$.

Otherwise, we claim that  $S \setminus \spa{\set{v\_1}} \neq \emptyset$

<br>

Indeed $S\setminus \spa{\set{v\_1}} \neq \emptyset$.

Assume that $S\setminus \spa{\set{v\_1}} = \emptyset$.

then $S \subseteq \spa{v\_1}$

then $\spa{S} \subseteq \spa{v\_1}$

then $V \subseteq \spa{v\_1}$

<br>

$v\_2\in V \setminus \spa{\set{v\_1}}$. Thus $\set{v\_1,v\_2} = \set{v\_1}\cup\set{v\_2}$ linearly independent by Theorem 1.7.

<br>

Step 2: check if $\spa{\set{v\_1, v\_2}} = V$?
If yes, then stop...
otherwise ....

Repeat this way after finitely many steps  (since S is a finite) we will get a set $T=\set{v\_1, v\_2, ..., v\_k}$ s.t. $T$ is linearly independent $\subset S$ and $\spa{T} = V$.

{{% /proof %}}

{{% /theorem %}}

{{% theorem name="Replacement Theorem" index="1.10" %}}
Let $V/F$ and $\beta = \set{v\_1, v\_2, ..., v\_n}$ be a basis of $V$.

Let $v \in V$ be a non-zero vector and $v=c\_1v\_1 + c\_2v\_2 + ... + c\_jv\_j + ... + a\_nv\_n$ s.t. $c\_j \neq 0$ Then $\set{v\_1, v\_2, ..., v\_{j-1}, v, v\_{j+1}, ..., v\_n}$ is a basis of $V$. i.e. the $j$th vector of $\beta$ can be replaced by $v$.

{{% proof name="" %}}

Denote $\set{v\_1, v\_2, ..., v\_{j-1}, v, v\_{j+1}, ..., v\_n}$ by $\beta'$.

want to prove: $\spa{\beta'} = V, \beta'$ is linearly independent.

let $u \in V, since \beta = \set{v\_1, v\_2, ..., v\_j, ..., v\_n}$ is a basis of $V, \exists a\_1, a\_2, a\_n \in F$ s.t. $u = \set{v\_1, v\_2, ..., v\_{j} ..., v\_n}$


We are given that $v = c\_1v\_1+ c\_2v\_2+ ...+ c\_jv\_j, ...+ c\_nv\_n$, and $c\_j \neq 0$

Solve for $v\_j$:
$c\_jv\_j = c\_1v\_1 + ... + c\_{j-1}v\_{j-1} -v + c\_{j+1}v\_{j+1} + ... + c\_nv\_n$

$\because c\_j \neq 0, \frac1{c\_j}$ exists

$v\_j = \sum^n\_{i=1}(-\frac{-c\_i}{c\_j}v\_i + \frac{1}{c\_j} v)   (i\neq j)$


$u = \sum^n\_{i=1}a\_iv\_i + \sum^n\_{i=1}(-\frac{-c\_i}{c\_j})a\_jv\_i + \frac{1}{c\_j} a\_jv (i\neq j)$

$u = \sum^n\_{i=1}(a\_i-\frac{-c\_i}{c\_j}c\_i)v\_i + \frac{1}{c\_j} v (i\neq j)$

$b\_1v\_1 +b\_2v\_2 + ... + b\_{j-1}v\_{j-1} + bv + b{j+1}v\_{j+1} + ... + b\_nv\_n = 0

$b\_1v\_1 +b\_2v\_2 + ... + b\_{j-1}v\_{j-1} + b(c\_1v\_1 + ... + c\_nv\_n) + b{j+1}v\_{j+1} + ... + b\_nv\_n = 0

$(b\_1 + bc\_1)v\_1 +(b\_2 + bc\_2)v\_2 + ... + (b\_{j-1} + bc\_{j-1})v\_{j-1}  + bc\_jv\_j + ...+ (b\_n + bc\_n) v\_n = 0

(c\_j \neq 0)$

since $\beta = \set {v\_1, v\_2, ..., v\_j, ..., v\_n}$ is a basis. It is linearly dependent.

$\therefore b\_c\_j = 0 \implies b = 0,c .....

lol, cant catch up


{{% /proof %}}
{{% /theorem %}}

{{% example name="$\R^3$" %}}
$\beta= \set{e\_1,e\_2,e\_3}$, standard basis.

$u = (-1, 0, \frac12) = -1e\_1 + 0e\_2+ \frac12 e\_3$

$\beta' = \set{u, e\_2, e\_3}$ is a basis.

{{% /example %}}

{{% corollary name="of theorem 1.10" index="1" %}}

$V/F, V$ is finite-dimensional,

Then any two basis of $V$ has exactly same number of elements, namely, $\dim V$.

{{% proof name="" %}}
let $\beta = \set{v\_1, v\_2, ..., v\_n}$ and $\gamma = \set{u\_1, u\_2, ..., u\_n}$ be two basis of $V$.

need to prove $\abs{\beta} \geq \abs{\gamma}$ and $\abs{\gamma} \geq \abs{\beta}$

$u\_1 \neq 0$

write $u\_1 = a\_1v\_1 + a\_2v\_2 + ... + a\_mv\_m$ one of the $a\_i$ is  non-zero without loss of generality we may assume that $a\_1 \neq 0$. Then by the replacement theorem, $\set{v\_1,v\_2, ..., v\_n}$ is a basis of $V$.
$\delta\_1 = \set{u\_1, v\_2, v\_3, ..., v\_m}$ is a basis of V.

write $u\_2 \in \delta$ is a linear combination from $\delta$,
i.e. $u\_2 = b\_1u\_1 + b\_2v\_2 + b\_3v\_3 + ... = b\_mv\_m$

$u\_2 \neq 0$

Claim At least that one of $b\_2, b\_3, ..., b\_m$ is non-zero

If not,  then assume they are all zeor i.e. b\_2=b\_3=...= b\_m =0

Then u\_2= b\_1u\_1 = $\set{u\_1, u\_2}$ is linearly dependent.
This is a contradiction since \delta is a basis if $b\_i \neq 0$


Aussume W.L.G. that $b2 \neq = 0$.

Then by Reprlacement theorem applied to $\delta\_1, \delta\_2 = \set{u\_1, u\_2, v\_3, v\_n, ..., v\_m}$ is a basis.

Continue this way until $\set{u\_1, u\_2, u\_3, ..., u\_n, v\_{n+1}, v\_{n+2}, ...,  v\_m}$
Similarly, $\abs{m}\leq n$

{{% /proof %}}

{{% /corollary %}}

{{% definition name="Dimensions of vector spaces" %}}

$V/F$. If $V$ is generated by a finite subset, then $V$ is called a **finite-dimensional vector space**. In this case the number of vectors in a basis of $V$ is called the **dimension** of $V$ denoted by $\dim V$.

If $V$ is NOT a finite-dimensional vector space, or alternatively if there exists an infinite linearly independent subset $S$ of $V$, i.e. $\abs{S} = \infty$ and $S$ is linearly independent, Then $V$ is called an **infinite-dimensional** vector space, and we write $\dim V = \infty$.

{{% /definition %}}

{{% example name="$P(x) / \R$" %}}

$\beta = \set{1, x, x^2, x^3, ...}$

$\dim\_\R \P(x) = \infty$

{{% /example %}}

{{% example name="$\R^\infty/\R$" %}}

$\dim\_\R \R^\infty = \infty$

{{% /example %}}

{{% example name="$\R^n/\R$" %}}

$e\_1 = (1, 0, ..., 0)$

$e\_2 = (0, 1, ..., 0)$

$e\_n = (0, 1, ..., n)$

$\beta = \set{e\_1, e\_2, ..., e\_n}, \dim\_\R R^n = n$.

{{% /example %}}

{{% example name="$M\_{m\times n}(\R)$" %}}

$\dim\_\R M\_{m\times n} = mn$

{{% /example %}}

{{% example name="$W \subseteq M\_{2\times 2}(\R)$" %}}

$W = \set{A \in M\_{2\times 2}(\R) | tr(A) = 0}$

$\dim\_\R W = 3$

{{% /example %}}

{{% example name="$\R/\R$" %}}

$\dim\_\R \R = 1$

In fact,

$\dim\_F F = 1$

{{% /example %}}

{{% example name="$\C/\R$" %}}

$\dim\_\C \R = 2$

{{% /example %}}

{{% example name="$\C^2/\R$" %}}

2. $V = \C^2, \F = \C, \dim\_\C \C^2 = 1$<br>
$\beta\_1 = \set{(1, 0), (0, 1)}/\C$
1. $V = \C^2, \F = \R, \dim\_\R \C^2 = 2$<br>
$\beta\_2 = \set{(1, 0), (i, 0), (0, 1), (0, -i)}/\C$
2. $V = \C^n, \F = \R, \dim\_\R \C^2 = 2n$<br>
{{% /example %}}

{{% remarks name="$\R/\Q$" %}}

$\dim\_\Q \R = \infty$(will be useful in MATH 131A)

{{% /remarks %}}

{{% corollary name="of theorem 1.9 & 1.10" index="2" %}}

Let $V$ be a $n$ dimension vector space over a field $F$.

i.e. $\dim V = n$

1. (a) Any finite generating set of $V$ must contain at least $n$ elements.<br>
$\forall S \subseteq V, \spa{S} = V \implies \abs{S} \geq n.$<br>
(b) Any finite generating set of $V$ containing exactly $n$ elements is a basis.<br>
$\forall S \subseteq V, \spa{S} = V, \abs{S} = n \implies S$ is a basis of $V$.

2. Any linearly independent subset of $V$ containing exactly $n$ elements is a basis.<br>
$\forall S \subseteq V, S$ is linearly independent, $\abs{S} = n \implies S$ is a basis of $V$.

3. Every linearly independent subset of $V$ can be extended to a basis of $V$.

{{% proof index="1(a)" name="by contradiction" %}}

Let $S$ be a finite set and $\spa{S} = V$.

**On the contrary**, assume that $\abs{S} < n$.

Since $S$ is finite and $\spa{S} = V$, <br>
by possibly remaining same vector from $S$, let $T$ be a subset of $S$ s.t. $T$ is a basis. (theorem 1.9)

$\dim V = \abs{T} \leq \abs{S} < n = \dim V$. **Contradiction**.

$\therefore \abs{S} \geq \dim V. $

{{% /proof %}}

{{% proof index="1(b)" name="by contradiction" %}}

$\abs{S} = n$ and $\spa{S} = V$. We try to prove that $S$ is not a basis.

**On the contrary** assume that $S$ is not a basis. Then, $S$ must be linearly dependent.

Let $T \subset S$ s.t. $T$ is a basis.

Then $\dim V = \abs{T} < \abs{S} = n = \dim{V}$. **Contradiction**.

$\therefore S $ must be a basis.

{{% /proof %}}

{{% proof index="2" name="" %}}
Let $S$ be a linearly independent, $\abs{S} = n = \dim V$.

Let $\beta = \set{v\_1, v\_2, ..., v\_n}$ be a basis of $V$.

Let $S = \set{u\_1, u\_2, ..., u\_n}$. Since $S$ is linearly independent. $u\_i \neq 0, \forall i = 1, 2, ..., n$.

Then by theorem 1.10,
we can replace $v\_1, v\_2, v\_3, ..., v\_n$ with $u\_1, u\_2, ..., u\_n$  one by one.

$\therefore u\_1, u\_2, ..., u\_n$ is a basis.

{{% /proof %}}

{{% proof name="3" %}}
Let $S = {v\_1, v\_2, ..., v\_k}$ be a linearly independent set in $V$.

if $\spa{S} = V$, then $S$ is already a basis. (definition of basis)<br>

If not, there exist a vector $w\_{k+1} \in V \setminus S$ s.t.

$T\_{k + 1} = S \cup \set{w\_{k+1}}$ is linearly independent.

Check if $\spa{T\_{k+1}} = V$?

If yes, then stop. and $T\_{k + 1}$ is a basis.

If not, continue is a basis.

Continuing this way, we will stop after a finitely many steps and with $T\_n = S \cup \set{w\_{k+1}, w\_{k+2}, w\_{k+3}, ...  w\_{n}}$   since $\dim V = n$.


{{% /proof %}}

{{% /theorem %}}

{{% theorem name="" index="" %}}

Let $V$ be a finite dimension vector space over a field $F$, and $W$ a subspace of $V$, then $\dim W \leq \dim V$.

Moreover, if $\dim W = \dim V$, then $W = V$.

{{% proof name="" %}}

DOUBLE CHECK

let $\dim V = n \geq 0$,

If  $W = \set{0}, \dim W = 0 \leq n = \dim V$<br>
so assume that $W \neq \set{0}$.

Then $\exists w\_1 \in w$ s.t.  $w\_1 \neq 0$

continuing this way, let $\set{w\_1, w\_2, ..., w\_k}$ be a linearly independent subset of $W$ s.t. if $w$ is any other vector in $W$ s.t. $w \notin \set{w\_1, w\_2, ..., w\_k}$, then $\set{w\_1, w\_2, ..., w\_k}\cup \set{w}$ is linearly dependent.

But $w\_1, w\_2, ..., w\_k$ is also linearly independent in V, since $W \subseteq V \implies$

{{% /proof %}}

{{% proof name="" %}}
Assume that $\dim W = \dim V = n$
let #\beta = \set{w\_1, w\_2, ..., \_n}# be a basis of $W$.
Then $\spa{\beta} = W$
and $w\_1, w\_2, ..., w\_n$ is a linearly independent set in $V$, since $W\subseteq V$.
This implies that $w\_1, w\_2, ..., w\_n$ is a bais of $V$, since $\dim V = n$, \therefore, $\spa{w\_1, w\_2, ..., w\_n}= V$
i.e. $\spa{\beta} = V$
We get $W=V$


{{% /proof %}}

{{% /corollary %}}

