---
title: "Discussion"
date: 2018-07-10T11:03:48+08:00
author: "Jim Zenn"
volumes: ["MATH 115A"]
layout: "note"
issue: D3

---

<!--more-->

<div class="latex-macros">
  {{< raw >}}
    $\newcommand{\R}{\mathbb{R}}$
    $\newcommand{\Q}{\mathbb{Q}}$
    $\newcommand{\Z}{\mathbb{Z}}$
    $\newcommand{\N}{\mathbb{N}}$
    $\newcommand{\C}{\mathbb{C}}$
    $\newcommand{\P}{\mathbb{P}}$
    $\newcommand{\F}{\mathbb{F}}$

    $\newcommand{\spa}[1]{\text{span}(#1)}$
    $\newcommand{\set}[1]{\{#1\}}$
    $\newcommand{\emptyset}{\varnothing}$
    $\newcommand{\union}{\cup}$
    $\newcommand{\intercept}{\cap}$
    $\newcommand{\abs}[1]{|#1|}$
    $\newcommand{\t#1}{\text}[1]$
    $\newcommand{\head}{\text H}$
    $\newcommand{\tail}{\text T}$
  {{< /raw >}}
</div>

# Definitions that you need to know
2. subspace
3. linear combinations, span
4. $S \subseteq V, V$ vector space, $S$ span $V ?$
5. linearly dependent / linearly independent
6. basis, $dim of V$, state the theorem

{{% theorem name="Replacement theorem" index="" %}}

$V$ vector space generated by $G, G$ has $n$ vectors. $L$ is set of independent $m$ vectors.

then 1. $m \leq n$
2. $\exists H \subseteq G s.t. n-m$ vectors and $L \cup H$ generates $V$.

{{% proof name="step 1" %}}

2 holds for all $0 \leq m \leq n$

That is given $m$ many independent vectors

There is $h \subseteq G s.t. H$ has $n-m$ vectors

and $L \cup H$ generates $V$


Induction on $m$

1) $m = 0; L = \emptyset,$ choose $H = G$,
Then $H$ has $n - 0$ has many vectors and $L \cup H - \emptyset \cup$

2) suppose 2 is true for some $0 \leq m \leq n - 1$ then we prove that 2 is also true for m + 1

let $G = \set{u\_1, u\_2, ..., u\_m}, L= \set{v\_1, v\_2, ..., v\_m+1}$

want to find $H \subseteq G s.t. \abs{H} = n-m-1, \spa{L \cup H} = V$

To do this consider $L'= \set{v\_1, v\_2, ..., v\_m}$,

because L is independent, L'; is also independent.

$\abs{L'} = m$ By inductive assumption, there is $H' \subseteq V s.t. \abs{H'} = n - m$ and $\spa{L' \cup H'} =V$

Let $H' = \set{W\_1, W\_2, ..., W\_{n-m}}$

Because $L' \cap H'$ generates $V$,

there are  $a\_1, a\_2, ..., a\_{m}, b\_1, b\_2, ..., b\_{n-m} s.t.$

$v\_{m+1} = a\_1v\_1 + a\_2v\_2 + ... + a\_mv\_m + b\_1w\_1 + b\_2w\_2 + ... + b\_{n-m}w\_{n-m}$

Claim i At least one of b is nonzero proof of claim 1 suppose not i.e. b\_1= b\_2= ...= b\_{n-m} = 0

Then v\_{m+1} = a\_1v\_1 + a\_2v\_2 + ... + a\_{m}v\_{m}, so L = \set{v\_1, v\_2, ..., v\_{m+1}} is not independent. contradiction.

WLOG,

assume b\_1 \neq By rearranging  * we have

w\_1 = {- \frac{a\_1}{b\_1} v\_1} + {- \frac{a\_2}{b\_2} v\_2} + ... + {- \frac{a\_1}{b\_1} v\_m}

we cllaim that H has desired properties. i.e. \abs{H} = n- m -1 (v) and L \cup H generates V.

We know \spa{v\_1, v\_2, ..., v\_{m}, w\_1, w\_2, ..., w\_{n-m}) = v\_1

w\_1 \in \spa{v\_1, v\_2, ..., v\_{m+1}, \_2, ..., \_{n-m}}

that means check


{{% /proof %}}

{{% proof name="step 2" %}}
suppose L has m many independent vectors, m \geq n +1

WLOG. it is sufficient to prove when m =m +1 L= \set{\_1, \_2, ..., \_{n+1}}, L'= \set{v\_1, v\_2, ..., v\_{n}}. By step 1, there is H \subseteq G s.t. \abs{H}= n- m = 0 and L' \cup H generates V, L' generates V.

In particular, v\_{n+1} \in V = \spa{L''}. this means V\_{n+1} is a linear combination of v\_1, v\_2, ..., v\_{n} \implies v\_1, v\_2, ..., v\_{n+1} are dependent.

contradiction. Therefore m \leq n.

{{% /proof %}}

{{% /theorem %}}

Recall \beta is a basis of V if \beta is an independent subset that generates V.

{{% corollary name="" index="" %}}

Let $\beta = \set{v\_1, v\_2, ..., v\_{n}}$ be a basis of $V$. Suppose $\set{w\_1, w\_2, ..., w\_{n}}$ is linearly independent, then $w\_1, w\_2, ..., w\_{n}$ is also a basis of $V$.

Equivalently, <br>
If $\dim V = n$, if $\abs{S} = n, S$ is linearly independent, then $S$ is a basis.

{{% proof name="???" %}}
Let $\dim V = n, \beta$ is a basis of $V , L = \set{w\_1, w\_2, ..., w\_{n}}, L$ is linearly independent.

$\exists H \subseteq \beta$ s.t. $\abs{H}= n-m=n-n =0$
and $\spa{L \cup H} = V = V$.

This implies that $H = \emptyset\ (\abs{H}=0)$

and $V = \spa{L \cup H} = \spa{L \cup \emptyset}$

$L$ is linearly independent and $L$ generates $V$\implies $L$ is a basis.

{{% /proof %}}


{{% /corollary %}}

{{% example name="section 1.6 / 20" %}}
$V/F, \dim V = n , S \subseteq V, \spa{S} = V$. <br>
(a) $\exists T \subseteq S, T$ is a basis of $V$. (do not assume S is finite)<br>
(b) Prove that $S$ contains at least $n$ vectors.

{{% proof index="" name="" %}}

Need to find $n$ linearly independent vectors in $S$, then corollary of theorem 1.10 finishes the proof.

Choose any $u\_1 \in S$, consider $W\_1 = \spa{u\_1}$.

{{% /proof %}}



Then  w\_1 \neq V.

there is another $ u\_2 \in S $ s.t. $ u\_2 notin \spa{u\_1}$

Given \set{u\_1, u\_2, ..., u\_{m}} where $1 \leq m \leq n-1$ choose u\_{m+1} \in S s.t. u\_{m+1} \in S s.t. u\_{m+1} \notin span{u\_1, ..., u\_m}.

check \set{u\_1, ..., u\_n} is independent.

{{% /example %}}


{{% example name="section 1.6 / 22" %}}

$W\_1, W\_2 \leq V , \dim V = n $, <br>
need to prove $ W\_1 \subseteq W\_2 \iff \dim(w\_1 \cap w\_2) = \dim W\_1$.

{{% proof name="$\implies$" %}}

easy. $W\_1 \cap W\_2  = W\_1$

{{% /proof %}}

{{% proof name="$\impliedby$" %}}

let $\dim (w\_1 \cap w\_2) = m $

(this is finite because dim V finite)

Let $\beta = \set{u\_1, u\_2, ..., u\_{m}}$ be a basis of $W\_1 \cap W\_2$.

For each $i,  u\_i \in W\_1 \cap W\_2 $, <br>
$ u\_i \in W\_1, \beta$ is an linearly independent subset of $W\_i$. $\abs{\beta} = m$.

$\dim W\_1 = \dim (W\_1 \cap W\_2) = m$

1 & 2 implies that \beta is a basis of W\_1 (corollary of replacement then)

u\_i \in W\_2, \forall i W\_2 is a vector space.

\spa{u\_1, u\_2, ..., u\_{m}} \leq W\_1

{{% /proof %}}

{{% /example %}}




23\. $v\_1 ~ v\_k, v \in V, W\_1 = \spa{v\_1, v\_2, ..., v\_{k}}, W\_2 = \spa{v\_1, v\_2, ..., v\_{k}, v}$

(a) \dim W\_1 = \dim W\_2

\iff v \in \spa{v\_1, v\_2, ..., v\_{k}}

\impliedby easy

\implies 1. \dim W\_1, \dim W\_2, are finite, \because it is generated by finite many vectors
2. Let n = \dim W\_1 \dim W\_2, choose a basis {u\_1, u\_2, ..., u\_{n}} of W\_1 W\_1 = \spa{u\_1, u\_2, ..., u\_{n}}

W\_1 \leq W\_2 (subspace)

\spa{u\_1, u\_2, ..., u\_{n}} \leq W\_2, subspace

\set{u\_1, u\_2, ..., u\_{n}} linearly independent vectors \in W\_2

also \dim W\_2 = n  \implies \set{u, n\_1, u, n\_2, ..., u, n\_{}} is a hosts of W\_2


{{% example name="section 1.6 / 26" %}}

$P\_n(\R)  = {f \in \P\_n(\R): f(a) = 0}$


pf 1. $W$ is a subspace of $P\_n(\R)$

2. Let $f \in W$.

$f(x) = a\_nx^n + ... +a\_1x+ a\_0$
and $f(a) = a^n \cdot a\_n + ...+ a \cdot a\_1+ a\_0 = 0$

$\dim P\_n(\R) = n+1$

$f(x) = a\_nx^n +...+ a\_0$

$f \in W, f(x) = a\_nx^n + ...+ a\_0$ + 1constraint $f(a) = 0$

find $n$ many linearly independent vectors of $W$

$\set{x^n-a^n, x^{n-1} - a^{n-1}, ..., x-a} 1 \leq 1 \leq n$

prove $\set{f\_1, ..., f\_n}$ is linearly independent

$W \leq Pn(f), \dim P\_n(f) = n+1$

$W \neq Pn(f) \dim W$ cannot be $n +1$

if $\dim W = n+1 = pn(f) $

w \leq p\_n(f)

{{% /example %}}

