---
title: "Vector Spaces"
date: 2018-06-25T11:03:48+08:00
volumes: ["1"]
layout: "note"
issue: 2
weight: 102

---

<p class="hide">Spaces, Vector Spaces, Degree of Polynomial, Fields.</p>

<!--more-->

<div class="latex-macros">
  {{< raw >}}
    $\newcommand{\br}{\\\\}$

    $\newcommand{\R}{\mathbb{R}}$
    $\newcommand{\Q}{\mathbb{Q}}$
    $\newcommand{\Z}{\mathbb{Z}}$
    $\newcommand{\N}{\mathbb{N}}$
    $\newcommand{\C}{\mathbb{C}}$
    $\newcommand{\P}{\mathbb{P}}$
    $\newcommand{\F}{\mathbb{F}}$
    $\newcommand{\L}{\mathcal{L}}$
    $\newcommand{\spa}[1]{\text{span}(#1)}$
    $\newcommand{\set}[1]{\\{#1\\}}$
    $\newcommand{\emptyset}{\varnothing}$
    $\newcommand{\otherwise}{\text{ otherwise }}$
    $\newcommand{\if}{\text{ if }}$
    $\newcommand{\union}{\cup}$
    $\newcommand{\intercept}{\cap}$
    $\newcommand{\abs}[1]{| #1 |}$
    $\newcommand{\pare}[1]{\left\(#1\right\)}$
    $\newcommand{\t}[1]{\text{ #1 }}$
    $\newcommand{\head}{\text H}$
    $\newcommand{\tail}{\text T}$
    $\newcommand{\inv}[1]{{#1}^{-1}}$
    $\newcommand{\nullity}[1]{\text{nullity}(#1)}$
    $\newcommand{\rank}[1]{\text{rank }#1}$
    $\newcommand{\oto}{\text{ one-to-one }}$
    $\newcommand{\ot}{\text{ onto }}$


    $\newcommand{\Vcw}[2]{\begin{bmatrix} #1 \br #2 \end{bmatrix}}$
    $\newcommand{\Vce}[3]{\begin{bmatrix} #1 \br #2 \br #3 \end{bmatrix}}$
    $\newcommand{\Vcr}[4]{\begin{bmatrix} #1 \br #2 \br #3 \br #4 \end{bmatrix}}$
    $\newcommand{\Vct}[5]{\begin{bmatrix} #1 \br #2 \br #3 \br #4 \br #5 \end{bmatrix}}$
    $\newcommand{\Vcy}[6]{\begin{bmatrix} #1 \br #2 \br #3 \br #4 \br #5 \br #6 \end{bmatrix}}$
    $\newcommand{\Vcu}[7]{\begin{bmatrix} #1 \br #2 \br #3 \br #4 \br #5 \br #6 \br #7 \end{bmatrix}}$

    $\newcommand{\Mqw}[2]{\begin{bmatrix} #1 & #2 \end{bmatrix}}$
    $\newcommand{\Mqe}[3]{\begin{bmatrix} #1 & #2 & #3 \end{bmatrix}}$
    $\newcommand{\Mqr}[4]{\begin{bmatrix} #1 & #2 & #3 & #4 \end{bmatrix}}$
    $\newcommand{\Mqt}[5]{\begin{bmatrix} #1 & #2 & #3 & #4 & #5 \end{bmatrix}}$

    $\newcommand{\Mwq}[2]{\begin{bmatrix} #1 \br #2 \end{bmatrix}}$
    $\newcommand{\Meq}[3]{\begin{bmatrix} #1 \br #2 \br #3 \end{bmatrix}}$
    $\newcommand{\Mrq}[4]{\begin{bmatrix} #1 \br #2 \br #3 \br #4 \end{bmatrix}}$
    $\newcommand{\Mtq}[5]{\begin{bmatrix} #1 \br #2 \br #3 \br #4 \br #5 \end{bmatrix}}$

    $\newcommand{\Mqw}[2]{\begin{bmatrix} #1 & #2 \end{bmatrix}}$
    $\newcommand{\Mwq}[2]{\begin{bmatrix} #1 \br #2 \end{bmatrix}}$
    $\newcommand{\Mww}[4]{\begin{bmatrix} #1 & #2 \br #3 & #4 \end{bmatrix}}$
    $\newcommand{\Mqe}[3]{\begin{bmatrix} #1 & #2 & #3 \end{bmatrix}}$
    $\newcommand{\Meq}[3]{\begin{bmatrix} #1 \br #2 \br #3 \end{bmatrix}}$
    $\newcommand{\Mwe}[6]{\begin{bmatrix} #1 & #2 & #3\br #4 & #5 & #6 \end{bmatrix}}$
    $\newcommand{\Mew}[6]{\begin{bmatrix} #1 & #2 \br #3 & #4 \br #5 & #6 \end{bmatrix}}$
    $\newcommand{\Mee}[9]{\begin{bmatrix} #1 & #2 & #3 \br #4 & #5 & #6 \br #7 & #8 & #9 \end{bmatrix}}$
  {{< /raw >}}
</div>

{{% definition name="Spaces" %}}
In mathematics, a space is a set with some added structure.
{{% /definition %}}

{{% definition name="Vector Spaces" %}}
A **vector space** (or **linear space**) $V$ over a field $F$ consists of a set where two operations (**vector addition** and **scalar multiplication**) are defined and satisfies the following properties:

1. $\forall x, y \in V, x + y = y + x$
<br> (commutativity of addition)
2. $\forall x, y, z \in V, (x + y) + z = x + (y + z)$
<br> (associativity of addition)
3. $\exists 0 \in V$ s.t. $\forall x \in V, x + 0 = x$
<br> (existence of identity element for addition, i.e null vector)
4. $\forall x \in V, \exists y \in V $ s.t. $x + y = 0$
<br> (existence of inversion for addition)
5. $\forall x \in V, 1x=x$
<br> (existence of identity element for multiplication)
6. $\forall a,b \in F, \forall x \in V, (ab)x=a(bx)$
7. $\forall a \in F, \forall x, y\in V, a(x+y)=ax+ay$
8. $\forall a,b \in F, \forall x \in V, (a+b)x = ax+ bx$

$x+y$ is called the **sum** of $x$ and $y$;
$ax$ the **product** of $a$ and $x$.

Elements of the field $F$ are called **scalars**;<br>
elements of the vector space $V$ are called **vectors**.

{{% /definition %}}

{{% example name="$\R^n/\R$" %}}

Prove that $\R^n / \R$ is a vector space. Notice that $\R^\infty$ is not included in this case, $\R^\infty$ is the set of **sequences**.

Proof scratch:

1.$\vec{v}+\vec{u}=\vec{u}+\vec{v}$

2.$(\vec{u}+\vec{v})+\vec{w} = \vec{u}+(\vec{v}+\vec{w}) $

3.$\exists \vec{0},\vec{u}+\vec{0}=\vec{u}$

4.$1\in \R, 1 \cdot \vec{u}=\vec{u}$

5.$a, b \in \R, a(b\vec{u})= (ab)\vec{u}$

6.$a,b \in \R, (a+b)\vec{u}=a\vec{u}+b\vec{u}$

7.$a\in \R, \vec{u},\vec{v}, a(\vec{u} + \vec{v})=a\vec{u} + a\vec{v}$

8.$\vec{u},-\vec{u}, \vec{u} + \vec{v}=\vec{0}$

{{% /example %}}

{{% example name="Arbitrary Polynomial" %}}

$\mathbb{P}\_n(x)=$set of all polynomials of degree$\leq n$ with real coefficient and in variable $x$.

**vector addition**:

With $f(x), g(x) \in \mathbb{P}\_n(x)$

$f(x) = a\_0+ a\_1x+ ... + a\_nx^n,$

$g(x) = b\_0 +b\_1x+ ... + b\_nx^n.$

$f(x)+g(x):=(a\_0+b\_0)+(a\_1 +b\_1)x+...+(a\_n+b\_n)x^n$

**scalar multiplication**:

$c\in F = \R, cf(x) := ca\_0 + (ca\_1)x + ... + (ca\_n)x^n$

we claim $\mathbb{P}\_n(x)$ is a vector space on $\R$ with respect to these two operations, because all the properties stands with defined vector addition and scalar multiplicaiton.

{{% /example %}}


{{% definition name="Degree of Polynomial" %}}

The highest term's index with <u>non-zero</u> coefficient.

{{% /definition %}}

{{% remarks name="what is the degree of zero polynomial: $f(x)=0$ ?" %}}

What is the degree of zero polynomial?<br>
**undefined** (some book states that the degree of zero polynomial is $-1$)

what can you fill in the boxes below so that the equation stands?

$0=\square x^\square$


{{% /remarks %}}

{{% example name="Real Sequence (!IMPORTANT)" %}}

$\R^\infty=\set{a\_1, a\_2, a\_3,..|a\_i \in \R}=\set{(a\_n)\_{n\geq1}, a\_n\in \R}$<br>
$(a\_n) + (b\_n) = (a\_n+b\_n)$<br>
$\lambda \in \R, \lambda (a\_n) = (\lambda a\_n)$

$\R^\infty/\R$ is a vector space.

{{% /example %}}

{{% example name="Real Matrix (!IMPORTANT)" %}}

$M\_{m\times n}(\R)$ = set of all $m \times n$ matrices with real entries.<br>
$A, B \in M\_{m \times n}(\R), A=(a\_{ij})\_{m\times n}, B=(b\_{ij})\_{m\times n}$<br>
$A+B=(a\_{ij}+b\_{ij})\_{m\times n}$<br>
$\lambda \in \R,\lambda A =(\lambda a\_{ij})\_{m\times n}$

$M\_{m\times n}(\R)/\R$ is a vector space.

Why matrix multiplication works that way?

{{% /example %}}

{{% example name="\"Bad Mutiplication\"" %}}

$\R^2 / \R$<br>
$(a\_1, a\_2)+(b\_1, b\_2) = (a\_1+b\_1, a\_2+b\_2)$<br>
$\lambda (a\_1, a\_2) = (\lambda a\_1, -a\_2)$<br>

$1(a\_1, a\_2) \neq (a\_1, a\_2)$
(VS 5 does not stand)

**NOT A VECTOR SPACE**

{{% /example %}}

{{% example %}}
$\R^4 / \R$<br>
$(a\_1, a\_2)+(b\_1, b\_2) = (a\_1+b\_1+1, a\_2+b\_2)$<br>
$\lambda (a\_1, a\_2) = (\lambda a\_1, \lambda a\_2)$

$\begin{align\*}\lambda ((a\_1, a\_2) + (b\_1, b\_2)) &= \lambda(a\_1 + b\_1 + 1, a\_2 + b\_2) \br &= (\lambda a\_1 + \lambda b\_1 + \lambda, \lambda a\_1 + \lambda b\_1)\end{align*}$
$\lambda(a\_1, a\_2) + \lambda(b\_1, b\_2) = (\lambda a\_1 + \lambda b\_1 + 1, \lambda b\_1 + \lambda b\_2)$

(VS 7 does not stand)

**NOT A VECTOR SPACE**

{{% /example %}}

{{% example %}}
$V=\set{a}, F=\R$<br>
$a+a=a$<br>
$\lambda a = a$

**Oui! C'est un vector space!**

Same as $V=\set{0}, F=\R$. Isomorphism.

$\P\_n(x) = \set{\text{polynomial of degree} \leq n}$ is a vector space over $\R$.

$\P(x) = \set{\text{all polynomials of every possible degree}}$ is a vector space over $\R$.

Infinity is not a valid degree. As we discussed before, degree must be a number, but infinity is not.

$P(x)$ is also a vector space

{{% /example %}}

{{% theorem name="Cancellation Law for Vector Addition" index="1.1" %}}

$x,y,z \in V$, if $x + z = y+z$, then $x= y$.

{{% proof %}}

$\exists v \in V $ s.t. $z+v = 0$   (VS4)

$\begin{align\*}
x &= x+0 \br
 &= x + (z+ v) \br
&= (x+ z) + v \br
&= (y + z) + v \br
&= y + (z + v) \br
&= y + 0 = y
\end{align*}$

{{% /proof %}}

{{% /theorem %}}


{{% corollary index="1" %}}

The **zero vector** (or **null vector**) $0$ described in VS3 is <u>unique</u>.

i.e. if $0, 0'$ both satisfy (VS3) then $0=0'$.

i.e. $\forall x \in V, x + 0=x, x + 0'=x$, then $0=0'$.

{{% proof %}}

let $x = 0, y = 0' $

$0 + x = x \implies 0 + 0 = 0$

$0 + y = y \implies 0 + 0' = 0$

$\therefore 0 + 0 = 0 + 0'$

$0 = 0'$(cancellation law)

{{% /proof %}}

{{% proof %}}

$0=0+0'=0'+0=0'$, so $0=0'$

{{% /proof %}}

{{% /corollary %}}


{{% corollary index="2" %}}

The **addtictive inverse** (vector) described in VS4 is <u>unique</u>.

The additive inverse of $x$ can be denoted by $-x$.

{{% /corollary %}}

{{% theorem name="" index="1.2" %}}
In any vector space $V$, the following statements are true:

1. $\forall x \in V, 0 \in F, 0x = 0.$
2. $\forall a \in F, \forall x \in V, (-a) x = -(ax) = a(-x).$
3. $\forall a \in F, 0 \in V, a0=0$.

<small>Please be careful what is the symbol '0' is referring to. When $0 \in F$, it is a scalar; when $0 \in V$, it is a vector.</small>

{{% /theorem %}}

{{% definition name="Fields" %}}

A **field** $F$ is a set on which two operations **addition** $+$ and **multiplication** $\cdot$ are defined so that following conditions are satisfied

1. $a+b=b+a, a\cdot b= b\cdot a$
<br> (commutativity of addition and multiplication)
2. $(a+b)+c=a+(b+c), (a\cdot b)\cdot c = a\cdot (b\cdot c)$
<br> (associativity of addition and multiplication)
3. $\exists 0 \in F, 1\in F$ s.t. $\forall a, 0+a=a, 1\cdot a = a$
<br> (existence of identity elements for addition and multiplication)
4. $a\in F, \exists c \in F$ s.t. $a+c=0$<br>
$b \in F, b \neq 0, \exists d \in F$ s.t. $b\cdot d = 1$
<br> (existence of inversion for addition and multipliation)
1. $a \cdot (b+c) = a\cdot b + a\cdot c$
<br> (distributivity of multiplication over addition)


<small>
The elements $x + y$ and $x \cdot y$ are called the **sum** and **product**, respectively of $x$ and $y$.
<br>
The elements $0$ and $1$ are called **identity elements** for addition and multiplication, respectively.
<br>
The elements  elements $c$ and $d$ referred to in (F 4) are called an **additive inverse** for $a$ and a **multiplicative inverse** for $b$, respectively.
</small>

{{% /definition %}}

{{% example name="" %}}

$\R$ is a field.
$\C$ is a field.
$\Q$ is a field.

$\Z$ is NOT a field.  (F4)

{{% /example %}}

{{% corollary name="" index="" %}}
Every field is a vector space over itself.
{{% /corollary %}}
