---
title: "Invertibility and Isomorphisms"
date: 2018-07-19T11:03:48+08:00
volumes: ["2"]
layout: "note"
type: "notes"
issue: 4
weight: 204

---

<!--more-->

<div class="latex-macros">
  {{< raw >}}
    $\newcommand{\br}{\\}$

    $\newcommand{\R}{\mathbb{R}}$
    $\newcommand{\Q}{\mathbb{Q}}$
    $\newcommand{\Z}{\mathbb{Z}}$
    $\newcommand{\N}{\mathbb{N}}$
    $\newcommand{\C}{\mathbb{C}}$
    $\newcommand{\P}{\mathbb{P}}$
    $\newcommand{\F}{\mathbb{F}}$
    $\newcommand{\L}{\mathcal{L}}$
    $\newcommand{\spa}[1]{\text{span}(#1)}$
    $\newcommand{\set}[1]{\{#1\}}$
    $\newcommand{\emptyset}{\varnothing}$
    $\newcommand{\otherwise}{\text{ otherwise }}$
    $\newcommand{\if}{\text{ if }}$
    $\newcommand{\union}{\cup}$
    $\newcommand{\intercept}{\cap}$
    $\newcommand{\abs}[1]{| #1 |}$
    $\newcommand{\pare}[1]{\left\(#1\right\)}$
    $\newcommand{\t}[1]{\text{ #1 }}$
    $\newcommand{\head}{\text H}$
    $\newcommand{\tail}{\text T}$
    $\newcommand{\d}{\text d}$
    $\newcommand{\inv}[1]{{#1}^{-1}}$
    $\newcommand{\nullity}[1]{\text{nullity}(#1)}$
    $\newcommand{\rank}[1]{\text{rank }#1}$
    $\newcommand{\nullity}[1]{\text{nullity}(#1)}$
    $\newcommand{\oto}{\text{ one-to-one }}$
    $\newcommand{\ot}{\text{ onto }}$


    $\newcommand{\Vcw}[2]{\begin{bmatrix} #1 \br #2 \end{bmatrix}}$
    $\newcommand{\Vce}[3]{\begin{bmatrix} #1 \br #2 \br #3 \end{bmatrix}}$
    $\newcommand{\Vcr}[4]{\begin{bmatrix} #1 \br #2 \br #3 \br #4 \end{bmatrix}}$
    $\newcommand{\Vct}[5]{\begin{bmatrix} #1 \br #2 \br #3 \br #4 \br #5 \end{bmatrix}}$
    $\newcommand{\Vcy}[6]{\begin{bmatrix} #1 \br #2 \br #3 \br #4 \br #5 \br #6 \end{bmatrix}}$
    $\newcommand{\Vcu}[7]{\begin{bmatrix} #1 \br #2 \br #3 \br #4 \br #5 \br #6 \br #7 \end{bmatrix}}$

    $\newcommand{\Mqw}[2]{\begin{bmatrix} #1 & #2 \end{bmatrix}}$
    $\newcommand{\Mqe}[3]{\begin{bmatrix} #1 & #2 & #3 \end{bmatrix}}$
    $\newcommand{\Mqr}[4]{\begin{bmatrix} #1 & #2 & #3 & #4 \end{bmatrix}}$
    $\newcommand{\Mqt}[5]{\begin{bmatrix} #1 & #2 & #3 & #4 & #5 \end{bmatrix}}$

    $\newcommand{\Mwq}[2]{\begin{bmatrix} #1 \br #2 \end{bmatrix}}$
    $\newcommand{\Meq}[3]{\begin{bmatrix} #1 \br #2 \br #3 \end{bmatrix}}$
    $\newcommand{\Mrq}[4]{\begin{bmatrix} #1 \br #2 \br #3 \br #4 \end{bmatrix}}$
    $\newcommand{\Mtq}[5]{\begin{bmatrix} #1 \br #2 \br #3 \br #4 \br #5 \end{bmatrix}}$

    $\newcommand{\Mqw}[2]{\begin{bmatrix} #1 & #2 \end{bmatrix}}$
    $\newcommand{\Mwq}[2]{\begin{bmatrix} #1 \br #2 \end{bmatrix}}$
    $\newcommand{\Mww}[4]{\begin{bmatrix} #1 & #2 \br #3 & #4 \end{bmatrix}}$
    $\newcommand{\Mqe}[3]{\begin{bmatrix} #1 & #2 & #3 \end{bmatrix}}$
    $\newcommand{\Meq}[3]{\begin{bmatrix} #1 \br #2 \br #3 \end{bmatrix}}$
    $\newcommand{\Mwe}[6]{\begin{bmatrix} #1 & #2 & #3\br #4 & #5 & #6 \end{bmatrix}}$
    $\newcommand{\Mew}[6]{\begin{bmatrix} #1 & #2 \br #3 & #4 \br #5 & #6 \end{bmatrix}}$
    $\newcommand{\Mee}[9]{\begin{bmatrix} #1 & #2 & #3 \br #4 & #5 & #6 \br #7 & #8 & #9 \end{bmatrix}}$
  {{< /raw >}}
</div>

{{% definition name="invertibility of linear transformation" status="" %}}

Let $V $ and $W $ be vector spaces, and let $T: V \to W $ be linear. A function $U: W \to V$ is said to be an **inverse** of $T $ if $TU = I\_W $ and $UT = I\_V $. If $T$ has an inverse, then $T $ is said to be **invertible**.

If $T$ is invertible, then the inverse of $T $ is <u>unique</u> and is denoted by $\inv{T} $.

The following facts hold for invertible functions $T $ and $U $.

1. $\inv{(TU)} = \inv{ U } \inv{ T } $
2. $\inv{(\inv{ T })} = T $ <br>
In particular, $\inv{ T } $ is invertible.
3. $V $ and $W $ are two finite dimensional spaces of equal dimension. $T: V \to W$ is linear.<br>
$T $ is invertible $\iff  \rank{ T } = \dim V$

{{% /definition %}}

{{% theorem name="" index="2.17" %}}

Let $V $ and $W $ be vector spaces, and let $T: V \to W $ be linear and invertible. Then $\inv{ T }: W \to V $ is linear.

{{% /theorem %}}

{{% definition name="Invertiblility of matrices" status="" %}}

Let $A $ an $n \times n $ matrix. Then $A $ is **invertible** if there exists an $n \times n $ matrix $B $ such that $AB = BA = I $.

If $A $ is invertible, then the matrix $B $ such that $AB = BA = I $ is unique. (If $C $ were another such matrix, then $C = CI = C(AB) = (CA)B = IB = B $.) The matrix $B $ is called the **inverse** of $A $ and is denoted by $\inv{ A } $.

{{% /definition %}}

{{% lemma name="" index="" %}}

Let $T $ be an invertible linear transformation from $V $ to $W $. Then $V $ is finite-dimensional if and only if $W $ is finite-dimensional. In this case, $\dim V = \dim W $.

{{% /lemma %}}

{{% theorem name="" index="2.18" status="" %}}

Let $V $ and $W $ be finite-dimensional vector spaces with ordered bases $\beta $ and $\gamma $, respectively. Let $T: V \to W $ be linear. Then $T $ is invertible if and only if $[ T ]\_{ \beta }^{ \gamma } $ is invertible. Furthermore, $[ \inv{ T } ]\_{ \gamma }^{ \beta } = \inv{([ T ]\_{ \beta }^{ \gamma })} $.

{{% /theorem %}}

{{% corollary name="" index="1" %}}

Let $V $ be a finite-dimensional vector space with an ordered basis $\beta$, and let $T: V \to V $ be linear. Then $T $ is invertible if and only if $[ T ]\_{ \beta } $ is invertible. Furthermore, $[ \inv{ T } ]\_{ \beta } = \inv{([ T ]\_{ \beta })} $.

{{% /corollary %}}

{{% corollary name="" index="2" %}}

Let $A $ be an $n \times n $ matrix. Then $A $ is invertible if and only if $L\_A $ is invertible. Furthermore, $\inv{(L\_A)} = L\_{ \inv{ A }}$

{{% /corollary %}}

{{% definition name="isomorphism" status="" %}}

Let $V $ and $W $ be vector spaces. We say that $V$ is **isomorphic** to $W $ if there exists a linear transformation $T: V \to W $ that is invertible. Such a linear transformation is called an **isomorphism** from $V $ onto $W $.

{{% /definition %}}

{{% theorem name="" index="2.19" status="star" %}}

Let $V $ and $W $ be finite-dimensional vector spaces (over the same field). Then $V$ is isomorphic to $W $ if and only if $\dim V = \dim W $.

{{% /theorem %}}

{{% corollary name="" index="" %}}

Let $V $ be a vector space over $F $. Then $V $ is isomorphic to $F^n $ if and only if $\dim V = n$.

{{% /corollary %}}

{{% theorem name="" index="2.20" status="" %}}

Let $V $ and $W $ be finite-dimensional vector spaces over $F $ of dimensions $n $ and $m $, respectively, and let $\beta $ and $\gamma $ be ordered bases for $V $ and $W $, respectively, then

the function $\Phi: \L(V, W) \to M\_{m \times n}(F)$, defined by $\Phi(T) = [ T ]\_{ \beta }^{ \gamma } $ for $T \in \L(V, W) $, is an isomorphism.

{{% /theorem %}}

{{% corollary name="" index="" %}}

Let $V $ and $W $ be finite-dimensional vector spaces of dimensions $n $ and $m $, respectively. Then $\L(V, W)$ is finite-dimensional of dimension $mn$.

{{% /corollary %}}

{{% definition name="standard representation of vector spaces" status="" %}}

Let $\beta$ be an ordered basis for an $n $-dimensional vector space V over the field $F $. The standard representation of $V $ with respect to $\beta $ is the function $\phi\_ \beta: V \to F^n $ defined by $\phi\_ \beta(x) = [x]\_ \beta $ for each $x \in V$.

{{% /definition %}}

{{% theorem name="" index="2.21" status="" %}}
For any finite-dimensional vector space $V $ with ordered basis $\beta , \phi\_ \beta $ is an isomorphism.
{{% /theorem %}}

