---
title: "Disucission: Midterm Review"
date: 2018-07-17T10:03:48+08:00
author: "Olga Turanova"
volumes: ["MATH 170A"]
layout: "note"
issue: D4


---

Discrete random variable.

<!--more-->

<div class="latex-macros">
  {{< raw >}}
    $\newcommand{\br}{\\}$

    $\newcommand{\R}{\mathbb{R}}$
    $\newcommand{\Q}{\mathbb{Q}}$
    $\newcommand{\Z}{\mathbb{Z}}$
    $\newcommand{\N}{\mathbb{N}}$
    $\newcommand{\C}{\mathbb{C}}$
    $\newcommand{\P}{\mathbb{P}}$
    $\newcommand{\F}{\mathbb{F}}$
    
    $\newcommand{\spa}[1]{\text{span}(#1)}$
    $\newcommand{\set}[1]{{#1}}$
    $\newcommand{\emptyset}{\varnothing}$
    $\newcommand{\otherwise}{\text{otherwise}$
    $\newcommand{\union}{\cup}$
    $\newcommand{\intercept}{\cap}$
    $\newcommand{\abs}[1]{|#1|}$
    $\newcommand{\pare}[1]{\left\(#1\right\)}$
    $\newcommand{\t#1}{\text}[1]$
    $\newcommand{\head}{\text H}$
    $\newcommand{\tail}{\text T}$

    $\newcommand{\Vcw}[2]{\begin{pmatrix} #1 \br #2 \end{pmatrix}}$
    $\newcommand{\Vce}[3]{\begin{pmatrix} #1 \br #2 \br #3 \end{pmatrix}}$
    $\newcommand{\Vcr}[4]{\begin{pmatrix} #1 \br #2 \br #3 \br #4 \end{pmatrix}}$
    $\newcommand{\Vct}[5]{\begin{pmatrix} #1 \br #2 \br #3 \br #4 \br #5 \end{pmatrix}}$
    $\newcommand{\Vcy}[6]{\begin{pmatrix} #1 \br #2 \br #3 \br #4 \br #5 \br #6 \end{pmatrix}}$
    $\newcommand{\Vcu}[7]{\begin{pmatrix} #1 \br #2 \br #3 \br #4 \br #5 \br #6 \br #7 \end{pmatrix}}$

    $\newcommand{\Mqw}[2]{\begin{bmatrix}#1 & #2 \end{bmatrix}}$
    $\newcommand{\Mqe}[3]{\begin{bmatrix}#1 & #2 & #3 \end{bmatrix}}$
    $\newcommand{\Mqr}[4]{\begin{bmatrix}#1 & #2 & #3 & #4 \end{bmatrix}}$
    $\newcommand{\Mqt}[5]{\begin{bmatrix}#1 & #2 & #3 & #4 & #5 \end{bmatrix}}$

    $\newcommand{\Mqw}[2]{\begin{bmatrix} #1 & #2 \end{bmatrix}}$
    $\newcommand{\Mwq}[2]{\begin{bmatrix} #1 \br #2 \end{bmatrix}}$
    $\newcommand{\Mww}[4]{\begin{bmatrix} #1 & #2 \br #3 & #4 \end{bmatrix}}$
    $\newcommand{\Mqe}[3]{\begin{bmatrix} #1 & #2 & #3 \end{bmatrix}}$
    $\newcommand{\Meq}[3]{\begin{bmatrix} #1 \br #2 \br #3 \end{bmatrix}}$
    $\newcommand{\Mwe}[6]{\begin{bmatrix} #1 & #2 & #3\br #4 & #5 & #6 \end{bmatrix}}$
    $\newcommand{\Mew}[6]{\begin{bmatrix} #1 & #2 \br #3 & #4 \br #5 & #6 \end{bmatrix}}$
    $\newcommand{\Mee}[9]{\begin{bmatrix} #1 & #2 & #3 \br #4 & #5 & #6 \br #7 & #8 & #9 \end{bmatrix}}$
  {{< /raw >}}
</div>

{{% example name="1c" %}}

Two fair six-sided dice are rolled. Find the probability that the sum of the outcome is 11.

$\Omega = \set{ (i, j) | i,j \in \set{ 1,2,...,6 } }$

$P( \text{ sum = 11 } ) = P( \set{ (5,6), (6,5) } ) = \frac{2}{ 36 } = \frac{1}{ 18 }$

{{% /example %}}

{{% example name="1c, with extra sauce" %}}

Roll 3 fair six-sided dice. Let X = sum of the outcomes. Find P(X=11).

Let $X_i = $ outcome of roll $i, i = 1,2,3$.

$X= X_1 + X_2 + X_3$

$$
\begin{align\*}
P( \text{ X = 11 } )
&= P( \text{ X\_1 + X\_2 + X\_3 = 11 } ) \br
&= \sum\_{ k=2 }^{ 10 }P(X_1 + X_2 = k)P(X_3 = 11-k | x_1 + x_2 = k) \br
&= \sum\_{ k=5 }^{ 10 } P(X_1 + X_2 =k)P(X_3 = 11 - k) \br
\end{align*}
$$

{{% /example %}}

{{% example name="1f" %}}

$6$ sheets of paper, labeled with #s from $1$ through $6$. Draw two simultaneously (without replacement). Find the probability that the sum of the umbers is $11$.

$\Omega = \set{ (i, ) | i \neq j, i,j \in \set{ 1,2,...,6 } }$

$P( \text{ um = 11 } ) = \frac{1}{ \binom{6}{2} }$

{{% /example %}}

{{% example name="2" %}}

Let X be discrete uniform on \set{ -3, -2,  -1, 0, 1, 2, 3 } <br>
a) Find the PMF of X

$P(X=k) = \begin{cases}
               \frac{1}{7} \text{ if } k \in \set{ -3, -2, -1, 0, 1, 2, 3 }
               0 \text{ otherwise }
            \end{cases}
$
b) $E[X] = \frac{1}{7} (-3 -2 -1 +0 + 1 + 2+ 3)$


{{% /example %}}

{{% remarks name="What should you check?" %}}

1. Is every probability between 0 and 1?
2. do all probabilities add up to one?

{{% /remarks %}}


{{% example name="3c" %}}
10 balls, numbered $0, 1, ..., 9$.
You keep drawing without replacement, until you draw the 0 ball.
For $k = 1, 2, 3, ..., 10$, find the probability that you need k draws to get the $0$. $X = $ number of balls drawn until you get the ball $0$.

$P(X = k) = \frac{ \binom{9}{ k-1 } (k-1)! \cdot 1 }{ \binom{ 10 }{k} k! } = \frac{1}{ 10 }$

{{% /example %}}

{{% example name="4d" %}}

Candidate is qualified with probability $q$; <br>
qualified candidate answers correctly with probability $p$; <br>
unqualified answers incorrectly with probability $p$; <br>
answers to different questions are independent.<br>
Company gives a candidate $15$ questions. Will hire if candidate answers all correctly. A candidate is selected at random, given, the test and is hired. Find probability that the candidate is qualified.

H = candidate hired, Q = candidate is qualified.

$P(Q|H) = \frac{ P(H |Q) P(Q) }{ P(H) } = \frac{ P(H|Q) P(Q) }{ P(H|Q) P(Q) + P(H|Q^c) P(Q^c)}= \frac{ p^{15} \cdot q }{ p^{15} \cdot q + (1-p)^{15} \cdot (1-q) }$

{{% /example %}}

