---
title: "Continuity and Connectedness"
date: 2019-02-11T13:21:00+08:00
volumes: ["9"]
layout: "note"
issue: 4
weight: 94

---

<!--more-->

<div class="latex-macros">
  {{< raw >}}
    $\newcommand{\br}{\\}$
    $\newcommand{\R}{\mathbb{R}}$
    $\newcommand{\Q}{\mathbb{Q}}$
    $\newcommand{\Z}{\mathbb{Z}}$
    $\newcommand{\N}{\mathbb{N}}$
    $\newcommand{\C}{\mathbb{C}}$
    $\newcommand{\P}{\mathbb{P}}$
    $\newcommand{\F}{\mathbb{F}}$
    $\newcommand{\L}{\mathcal{L}}$
    $\newcommand{\spa}[1]{\text{span}(#1)}$
    $\newcommand{\dist}[1]{\text{dist}(#1)}$
    $\newcommand{\max}[1]{\text{max}(#1)}$
    $\newcommand{\min}[1]{\text{min}(#1)}$
    $\newcommand{\supr}[1]{\text{sup}(#1)}$
    $\newcommand{\infi}[1]{\text{inf}(#1)}$
    $\newcommand{\ite}[1]{\text{int}(#1)}$
    $\newcommand{\ext}[1]{\text{ext}(#1)}$
    $\newcommand{\bdry}[1]{\partial #1}$
    $\newcommand{\argmax}[1]{\underset{#1}{\text{argmax }}}$
    $\newcommand{\argmin}[1]{\underset{#1}{\text{argmin }}}$
    $\newcommand{\set}[1]{\left\{#1\right\}}$
    $\newcommand{\emptyset}{\varnothing}$
    $\newcommand{\tilde}{\text{~}}$
    $\newcommand{\otherwise}{\text{ otherwise }}$
    $\newcommand{\if}{\text{ if }}$
    $\newcommand{\proj}{\text{proj}}$
    $\newcommand{\union}{\cup}$
    $\newcommand{\intercept}{\cap}$
    $\newcommand{\abs}[1]{\left| #1 \right|}$
    $\newcommand{\norm}[1]{\left\lVert#1\right\rVert}$
    $\newcommand{\pare}[1]{\left(#1\right)}$
    $\newcommand{\brac}[1]{\left[#1\right]}$
    $\newcommand{\t}[1]{\text{ #1 }}$
    $\newcommand{\head}{\text H}$
    $\newcommand{\tail}{\text T}$
    $\newcommand{\d}{\text d}$
    $\newcommand{\limu}[2]{\underset{#1 \to #2}\lim}$
    $\newcommand{\der}[2]{\frac{\d #1}{\d #2}}$
    $\newcommand{\derw}[2]{\frac{\d #1^2}{\d^2 #2}}$
    $\newcommand{\pder}[2]{\frac{\partial #1}{\partial #2}}$
    $\newcommand{\pderw}[2]{\frac{\partial^2 #1}{\partial #2^2}}$
    $\newcommand{\pderws}[3]{\frac{\partial^2 #1}{\partial #2 \partial #3}}$
    $\newcommand{\inv}[1]{{#1}^{-1}}$
    $\newcommand{\inner}[2]{\langle #1, #2 \rangle}$
    $\newcommand{\nullity}[1]{\text{nullity}(#1)}$
    $\newcommand{\rank}[1]{\text{rank }#1}$
    $\newcommand{\nullspace}[1]{\mathcal{N}\pare{#1}}$
    $\newcommand{\range}[1]{\mathcal{R}\pare{#1}}$
    $\newcommand{\var}[1]{\text{var}\pare{#1}}$
    $\newcommand{\cov}[2]{\text{cov}(#1, #2)}$
    $\newcommand{\tr}[1]{\text{tr}(#1)}$
    $\newcommand{\oto}{\text{ one-to-one }}$
    $\newcommand{\ot}{\text{ onto }}$
    $\newcommand{\ceil}[1]{\lceil#1\rceil}$
    $\newcommand{\floor}[1]{\lfloor#1\rfloor}$
    $\newcommand{\Re}[1]{\text{Re}(#1)}$
    $\newcommand{\Im}[1]{\text{Im}(#1)}$
    $\newcommand{\dom}[1]{\text{dom}(#1)}$
    $\newcommand{\fnext}[1]{\overset{\sim}{#1}}$
    $\newcommand{\transpose}[1]{{#1}^{\text{T}}}$
    $\newcommand{\b}[1]{\boldsymbol{#1}}$
    $\newcommand{\None}[1]{}$
    $\newcommand{\Vcw}[2]{\begin{bmatrix} #1 \br #2 \end{bmatrix}}$
    $\newcommand{\Vce}[3]{\begin{bmatrix} #1 \br #2 \br #3 \end{bmatrix}}$
    $\newcommand{\Vcr}[4]{\begin{bmatrix} #1 \br #2 \br #3 \br #4 \end{bmatrix}}$
    $\newcommand{\Vct}[5]{\begin{bmatrix} #1 \br #2 \br #3 \br #4 \br #5 \end{bmatrix}}$
    $\newcommand{\Vcy}[6]{\begin{bmatrix} #1 \br #2 \br #3 \br #4 \br #5 \br #6 \end{bmatrix}}$
    $\newcommand{\Vcu}[7]{\begin{bmatrix} #1 \br #2 \br #3 \br #4 \br #5 \br #6 \br #7 \end{bmatrix}}$
    $\newcommand{\vcw}[2]{\begin{matrix} #1 \br #2 \end{matrix}}$
    $\newcommand{\vce}[3]{\begin{matrix} #1 \br #2 \br #3 \end{matrix}}$
    $\newcommand{\vcr}[4]{\begin{matrix} #1 \br #2 \br #3 \br #4 \end{matrix}}$
    $\newcommand{\vct}[5]{\begin{matrix} #1 \br #2 \br #3 \br #4 \br #5 \end{matrix}}$
    $\newcommand{\vcy}[6]{\begin{matrix} #1 \br #2 \br #3 \br #4 \br #5 \br #6 \end{matrix}}$
    $\newcommand{\vcu}[7]{\begin{matrix} #1 \br #2 \br #3 \br #4 \br #5 \br #6 \br #7 \end{matrix}}$
    $\newcommand{\Mqw}[2]{\begin{bmatrix} #1 & #2 \end{bmatrix}}$
    $\newcommand{\Mqe}[3]{\begin{bmatrix} #1 & #2 & #3 \end{bmatrix}}$
    $\newcommand{\Mqr}[4]{\begin{bmatrix} #1 & #2 & #3 & #4 \end{bmatrix}}$
    $\newcommand{\Mqt}[5]{\begin{bmatrix} #1 & #2 & #3 & #4 & #5 \end{bmatrix}}$
    $\newcommand{\Mwq}[2]{\begin{bmatrix} #1 \br #2 \end{bmatrix}}$
    $\newcommand{\Meq}[3]{\begin{bmatrix} #1 \br #2 \br #3 \end{bmatrix}}$
    $\newcommand{\Mrq}[4]{\begin{bmatrix} #1 \br #2 \br #3 \br #4 \end{bmatrix}}$
    $\newcommand{\Mtq}[5]{\begin{bmatrix} #1 \br #2 \br #3 \br #4 \br #5 \end{bmatrix}}$
    $\newcommand{\Mqw}[2]{\begin{bmatrix} #1 & #2 \end{bmatrix}}$
    $\newcommand{\Mwq}[2]{\begin{bmatrix} #1 \br #2 \end{bmatrix}}$
    $\newcommand{\Mww}[4]{\begin{bmatrix} #1 & #2 \br #3 & #4 \end{bmatrix}}$
    $\newcommand{\Mqe}[3]{\begin{bmatrix} #1 & #2 & #3 \end{bmatrix}}$
    $\newcommand{\Meq}[3]{\begin{bmatrix} #1 \br #2 \br #3 \end{bmatrix}}$
    $\newcommand{\Mwe}[6]{\begin{bmatrix} #1 & #2 & #3\br #4 & #5 & #6 \end{bmatrix}}$
    $\newcommand{\Mew}[6]{\begin{bmatrix} #1 & #2 \br #3 & #4 \br #5 & #6 \end{bmatrix}}$
    $\newcommand{\Mee}[9]{\begin{bmatrix} #1 & #2 & #3 \br #4 & #5 & #6 \br #7 & #8 & #9 \end{bmatrix}}$
  {{< /raw >}}
</div>

{{% definition name="connected spaces" status="" %}}

$(X,d)$.

We say that $X$ is **disconnected** iff <br>
there exist disjoint non-empty open sets $V, W \subset X$ such that $V \cup W = X$.

Equivalently, $X$ is **disconnected** iff <br>
$X$ contains a non-empty proper subset which is simultaneously closed and open.

We say that $X$ is **connected** iff <br>it is <u>non-empty</u> and <u>not disconnected</u>.

{{% /definition %}}

{{% note name="How to prove $X $ is connected" %}}

1. Look at "nice" parts of $X$(e.g. connected parts)

2. Build up $X $ via connected parts

{{% /note %}}

{{% proposition name="" index="" status="" %}}

If $E \subset X $ is connected, and I'm givien $X \subset A \cup B $. ($A $ and $B $ disjoint and open).

Then $E \subset A $(and $E \cap B = \emptyset $)

or $E \subset B $(and $E \cap A = \emptyset $)

{{% /proposition %}}

{{% example name="" %}}

In $\R^2 $ look at (euclidean metric) $X = B((-1, 0), 1) \cup B((1, 0), 1) \cup \set{(0,0)} $. Prove that $X $ is connected.

{{% proof index="" method="" %}}

Use contradiction plus proposition.

Assume $X $ is disconnected, i.e. exists $A $ and $B $ open with $X \subset A \cup B $ and $A \cap B  = \emptyset$(disjoint).

Homework: $B((-1, 0), 1)$ and $B((1, 0), 1)$ are connected.

without loss of generality, assume $(0, 0) \in A $, note $A $ intersect both
circles. Then since these are connected.

$B((-1, 0), 1)  \cup B((1, 0), 1) \subset A$.

$X \subset A$ This means $X $ is connected.

{{% /proof %}}

{{% /example %}}

{{% example name="Topologist sine curve in $(\R^2, d\_{l^2})$" %}}

Let $X$ be the union of two sets.

$E\_1 =$ closed line segment from $(0, -1) $ to $(0 , 1) $

$E\_2 =$ graph of $f(x) = \sin (\frac{ 1 }{ x }) $ from $x \in (0, 1] $

Let $X$ be the union of two sets.

Prove that $X$ is connected.

{{% proof index="" method="" %}}

If $X = A \cup B $  ($A \cap B = \emptyset A$ and $B$ open)

without loss of generality, $A $ contains $(0, 0) $. Then $A $ intersects

$E\_1 $ and $E\_2 $(which are connected)

$X = E\_1 \cup E\_2 \subset A $

{{% /proof %}}

{{% /example %}}

{{% note name="connectedness of the empty set" %}}

We declare the empty set $\emptyset$ as being special - it is neither connected nor disconnected.

{{% /note %}}

{{% definition name="Connected sets" status="" %}}

Let $(X,d)$ be a metric space, and $Y \subseteq X$.

$Y$ is **connected** iff the metric space $(Y, d|\_{Y \times Y})$ is connected;

$Y$ is **disconnected** iff the metric space $(Y, d|\_{Y \times Y})$ is disconnected.

{{% /definition %}}

{{% example name="" %}}

$(\R, d\_{ \text{disc}})$ is disconnected.

{{% /example %}}

{{% remarks name="" %}}

The property of connectedness is intrinsic; whether a set $Y$ is connected or
not depends only on what the metric is doing on $Y$, but not on what ambient
space $X$ one placing $Y$ in.

{{% /remarks %}}

{{% theorem name="" index="" status="" %}}

Let $X \subseteq \R$. Then the following statements are equivalent.

1. $X$ is connected.

2. Whenever $x, y \in X$ and $x < y$, the interval $[x, y]$ is also
contained in X.

3. $X$ is an interval.

{{% /theorem %}}

{{% theorem name="Continuity preserves connectedness" index="" status="" %}}

Let $f: X \to Y$ be a function between metric spaces.

If $E \subseteq X$ is connected, and $f$ is continuous.

Then $f(E) \subseteq Y$ is connected.

{{% proof index="" method="" %}}

$f(E) $ is either connected or disconnected.

Assume $f(E) $ is disconnected.

There exists set

$U, V \subseteq Y $ open.

$U \cap f(E) $ and $V \cap f(E) $ non-empty.

$(U \cap f(E)) \cap (V \cap f(E)) = \emptyset$

$U \cup V \supseteq f(E) $

$W\_1 = \inv{ f }(U) $

$W\_2 = \inv{ f }(V) $

{{% /proof %}}

{{% /theorem %}}

{{% corollary name="Intermediate value theorem" index="" %}}

Let $f: X \to \R$ be a continuous map from one metric space $(X, d\_X)$ to
the real line. Let $E$ be any connected subset of $X$, and let $a, b$ be any
two elements of $E$. Let $y$ be a real number between $f(a)$ and $f(b)$.
Then there exists $c \in E$ such that $f(c) = y$.

{{% /corollary %}}

========================================================================

{{% definition name="" status="" %}}

Let $f: X \to Y $, a function between metric spaces $E \subseteq X $, $x\_0 \in X $
, an adherent point of $E$, and $L \in Y$. (candidate for a limiting value)

We say $L$ is the limit as $X$ of $f$ tends to $x\_0$ along $E$. ($\limu{ x }{ x\_0 } f(x) = L, x \in E $) iff $\forall \epsilon > 0, \exists \delta > 0 $ such that if $x \in E $ with $d(x, x\_0) < \delta $, then $d(f(x), L) < \epsilon $.

Observation: $f(x\_0)$ may not be defined, but a limit may still exist.

Observation:

$\limu{ x }{ x\_0 } f(x) \to \limu{ x }{ x\_0 } f(x), x \in X \ \set{ x\_0 }$

$\limu{ x }{ x\_0^- } f(x) \to \limu{ x }{ x\_0 } f(x), x \in \set{  X < x\_0 }$


Observation:

$f$ is continuous at $x\_0 $ iff

$\limu{ x }{ x\_0 }, x \in X \setminus \set{ x\_0 } f(x) = f(x\_0) $

1. $\lim f(x)$ exists

2. $f$ is defined at $x\_0$

3. equality between limiting value and function value

Observation:

If condition (1) holds, then $x\_0$ is a removable discontinuity.

{{% /definition %}}

{{% theorem name="" index="" status="" %}}

Let $f: X \to Y $ be a function between metric spaces. $E \subseteq X, x\_0 \in \overline{ E } , L \in Y$

The following 4 statements are equivalent:

1. $\limu{ x }{ x\_0 } f(x) = L$, $x \in E $

2. $\forall (x^{(n)})^\infty\_{ n =1} $ sequences in $E$ such that $(x^{(n)})^\infty\_{ n =1} \to x\_0 $ we have $(f(x^{(n)}))^\infty\_{ n =1} \to L$

3. $\forall V \subseteq Y$ open containing $L $, $\exists U \subseteq X $ open
such that $f(U \cap E) \subseteq V$($U \cap E$ is relatively open in $E$).

4. $g : E \cup \set{ x\_0 } \to Y$ defined by $g(x) = \begin{cases}
f(x)&\text{ if }x \neq x\_0 \br
L&\text{ if }x = x\_0
\end{cases}$

is a continuous function. Furthermore, if $x\_0 \in E$, then $f(x\_0) = L$.

{{% /theorem %}}

{{% note name="Proving moves of convergence" %}}

{{% /note %}}

{{% note name="" %}}

$(X, d\_{disc}) $ be a metric space with the discrete metric. Let $E $ be a
subset of $X$ which contains at least two elements. Then $E $ is disconnected.

TODO: proof

{{% /note %}}

{{% note name="" %}}

$(X, d) $ connected. $(Y, d\_{disc}) $. $f: X \to Y$.

$$f\text{ continuous} \iff f\text{ constant} $$

TODO: proof

{{% /note %}}

{{% note name="" %}}

$(X,d)$, and let $(E\_ \alpha)\_{ \alpha \in I } $ be a collection of connected sets in $X$. Suppose also that $\bigcap\_{ \alpha \in I } E\_ \alpha$ is non-empty.

$\bigcup\_{ \alpha \in I } E\_ \alpha$ is connected.

TODO: proof

{{% /note %}}
