---
title: "Subspaces"
date: 2018-06-27T11:03:48+08:00
author: "Jim Zenn"
volumes: ["Math 115A"]
issue: 3
hide: true

---

Subspaces, theorem 1.3: properties of subspaces

<!--more-->

<div class="latex-macros">
  {{< latexdef "\R" "\mathbb{R}" >}}
  {{< latexdef "\Q" "\mathbb{Q}" >}}
  {{< latexdef "\Z" "\mathbb{Z}" >}}
  {{< latexdef "\N" "\mathbb{N}" >}}
  {{< raw >}}
    $\def\set#1{{\{#1\}}}$
    $\def\emptyset{{\varnothing}}$
    $\def\abs#1{{|#1|}}$  
    $\def\tr#1{{\text{tr}(#1)}}$  
  {{< /raw >}}
</div>

{{% definition name="Subspaces" %}} 

A subset $W$ of a vector space $V$ over a Field $F$ is called a **subspace** if $W$ is a vector space over $F$ is a vector space, denoted by $W \leq V$.

{{% /definition %}}

{{% note name="" %}} 

In any vector space $V$, $V$ itself and $\set{0}$ are subspaces. The latter is called the **zero subspace** of $V$.

{{% /note %}}

{{% theorem name="Properties of subspaces" index="1.3" %}} 

Additionally, a subset $W$ of a vector space $V$ is a subspace of $V$ if and only if the following three properties hold.

1. $W$ has a zero vector.
2. $x + y \in W$ whenever $x\in W$ and $y \in W$. ($W$ is **closed under addition**)
3. $cx \in W$ whenever $c \in F$ and $x \in W$. ($W$ is **closed under scalar multiplication**)

{{% proof name="" %}} 

<u>Assume that $W$ is a subspace.</u>

This implies from the definition of subspace that $W$ itself is a vector space over $F$. then for all three of the properties are satisfiled.

<br>

<u>Assume that the three properties holds for $W$.</u> We need to proof that $W$ is a subspace of $V$, i.e. itself is a vector space.

1. $w_1 + w_2 = w_2 + w_1, \forall w_1, w_2 \in W \subseteq V$
2. $(w_1 + w_2) + w_3 = w_1 + (w_2 + w_3）, \forall w_1, w_2, w_3 \in W \subseteq V$
3. The third property.
4. let $c= -1 \in F$， $\forall x \in W \subseteq V, x + (-1)x = (1-1) x = 0$
5. $1w=w, \forall w \in W \subseteq V$
6. $\forall a,b \in F, \forall x \in W \subseteq V, (ab)x=a(bx)$
7. $\forall a \in F, \forall x, y\in W \subseteq V, a(x+y)=ax+ay$
8. $\forall a,b \in F, \forall x \in W \subseteq V, (a+b)x = ax+ bx$


{{% /proof %}}

{{% /theorem %}}

{{% example name="$ \R^2/\R=$ XY-plane" %}} 

{{% /example %}}

{{% example name="X-axis" %}} 

W=$\{(a,0)|a\in\R\}$

1. $(0,0)\in W$
2. $(a,0) + (b,0) = (a+b, 0) \in W, V$
3. $\lambda \in \R, \lambda(a, 0) = (\lambda a, 0) \in W$

$\therefore W$ is a subspace of $\R^2$

Any straight line in $\R^2$ that passes througth the origin is a subspace of $\R^2$


{{% /example %}}

{{% examples name="" %}} 

$W = \set{A\in M_{n\times n}(\R)|A^T=A}=$ Set of all symentric matrices is a subspace.

Set of all diagnal matrices is a subspace.

Set of all invertible matrices is **NOT** a subspace.

Set of all upper triangular matrices is a subspace.

Set of all lower triangular matrices is a subspace.

$ W = \set{A\in M_{n\times n}|A^2=A}$ is **NOT** a subspace.

$W=\set{A\in M\_{n\times n}\(R\)| \tr{A}=0\}$ is a subspace.

$\R^n$, hyperplanes that passes through the origin $a_1x_1+a_2x_2+...+a_nx_n=0$ are subspaces.

{{% /examples %}}

{{% example name="$\R^5$" %}} 
$\R^5, W =\set{(x_1, x_2,x_3,x_4,x_5)\in \R^5 | x_1-x_2+x_5=0, 2x_3+7x_4=0}$. subspace.

1. (0,0,0,0,0) \in W, since <br>
$0- 0+0 =0$<br>
$2\cdot0+7\cdot0=0$

2. $(x_1, x_2,...,x_5)\in W \implies x_1-x_2+x_5=0  (1), 2x_3+7x_4=0   (2)$<br>
$(y_1,y_2,...,y_5) \in W \implies  y_1-y_2+y_5=0  (3), 2y_3+7y_4=0  (4)$<br>
$(x_1+y_1,x_2+y_2,...x_5+,y_5) \in W$<br>
$(1)+(3) = 0, (2)+(4) = 0$
3. trivial

{{% /example %}}

{{% theorem name="" index="1.4" %}} 
The intersection of any number (incountable is also included) of subspaces of $V$ is again a subspace of $V$.
{{% /theorem %}}

{{% remarks name="" %}} 
Union of TWO subspaces may not be a subspace in general.

Union is a subspace iff. one subspace is the subset of the other.
{{% /remarks %}}
