---
title: "Discussion"
date: 2018-07-05T11:03:48+08:00
author: "Jim Zenn"
volumes: ["Math 115A"]
issue: 6
hide: true

---

Span, linear combination, linearly dependent, linearly independent.

<!--more-->

<div class="latex-macros">
  {{< raw >}}
    $\newcommand{\R}{\mathbb{R}}$
    $\newcommand{\Q}{\mathbb{Q}}$
    $\newcommand{\Z}{\mathbb{Z}}$
    $\newcommand{\N}{\mathbb{N}}$
    $\newcommand{\C}{\mathbb{C}}$
    $\newcommand{\P}{\mathbb{P}}$
    $\newcommand{\F}{\mathbb{F}}$
    $\newcommand{\B}{\beta}$
    $\newcommand{\spa}[1]{\text{span}(#1)}$
    $\newcommand{\set}[1]{\{#1\}}$
    $\newcommand{\emptyset}{\varnothing}$
    $\newcommand{\union}{\cup}$
    $\newcommand{\intercept}{\cap}$
    $\newcommand{\abs}[1]{|#1|}$
    $\newcommand{\t#1}{\text}[1]$
    $\newcommand{\head}{\text H}$
    $\newcommand{\tail}{\text T}$
  {{< /raw >}}
</div>

# Definitions
2. subspace
3. linear combinations, span
4. $S \subseteq V, V vector space, S span V ?$
5. linearly dependent / linearly independent
6. basis, dim of V, state the theorem

{{% theorem name="Replacement theorem" index="" %}}

$V$ vector space generated by $G$

$G$ has n vectors

L is set of independent m vectors

then 1. m leq n
2. $exists H \subseteq G s.t. n-m$ vectors and $L \cup H generates V$.

{{% proof name="step 1" %}}

2 holds for all 0 leq m leq n

that is given m many indep vectors

there is h \subseteq G s.t. H has n-m vectors

and L \cup H generates V


Induction on m

1) m = 0; L = \emptyset, choose H = G
Then H has n - 0 has many vectors and L \cup H - \emptyset \cup

2) suppose 2 is true for some 0 \leq m \leq n - 1 then we prove that 2 is also true for m + 1

let G = \set{ u\_1, u\_2, ..., u\_m }, L= \set{ v\_1, v\_2, ..., v\_m+1 }

want to find H \subseteq G s.t. \abs{H} = n-m-1, \spa{L \cup H} = V

To do this consider L'= \set{ v\_1, v\_2, ..., v\_m },

because L is independent, L'; is also independent.

\abs{L'} = m By inductive assumption, there is H' \subseteq V s.t. \abs{H'} = n -m and \spa{L' \cup H'} =V

Let H' = \set{ W\_1, W\_2, ..., W\_{n-m} }

Because L' \cap H' generates V,

there are  a\_1, a\_2, ..., a\_{m}, b\_1, b\_2, ..., b\_{n-m} s.t.

v_{m+1} = a\_1v\_1 + a\_2v\_2 + ... + a\_mv\_m + b\_1w\_1 + b\_2w\_2 + ... + b\_{n-m}w\_{n-m}

Claim i At least one of b is nonzero proof of claim 1 suppose not i.e. b\_1= b\_2= ...= b\_{n-m} = 0

Then v_{m+1} = a\_1v\_1 + a\_2v\_2 + ... + a\_{m}v\_{m}, so L = \set{ v\_1, v\_2, ..., v\_{m+1} } is not independent. contradiction.

WLOG,

assume b_1 \neq By rearranging  * we have

w_1 = {- \frac{a_1}{b_1} v_1} + {- \frac{a_2}{b_2} v_2} + ... + {- \frac{a_1}{b_1} v_m}

we cllaim that H has desired properties. i.e. \abs{H} = n- m -1 (v) and L \cup H generates V.

We know \spa{ v\_1, v\_2, ..., v\_{m}, w\_1, w\_2, ..., w\_{n-m}) = v_1

w_1 \in \spa{ v\_1, v\_2, ..., v\_{m+1}, \_2, ..., \_{n-m} }

that means check


{{% /proof %}}

{{% proof name="step 2" %}}
suppose L has m many independent vectors, m \geq n +1

WLOG. it is sufficient to prove when m =m +1 L= \set{ \_1, \_2, ..., \_{n+1} }, L'= \set{ v\_1, v\_2, ..., v\_{n}}. By step 1, there is H \subseteq G s.t. \abs{H}= n- m = 0 and L' \cup H generates V, L' generates V.

In particular, v_{n+1} \in V = \spa{L''}. this means V_{n+1} is a linear combination of v\_1, v\_2, ..., v\_{n} \implies v\_1, v\_2, ..., v\_{n+1} are dependent.

contradiction. Therefore m \leq n.

{{% /proof %}}

{{% /theorem %}}

Recall \B is a basis of V if \B is an independent subset that generates V.

Corollary Let \B = \set{ v\_1, v\_2, ..., v\_{n} | is a basis of V } suppose \set{ w\_1, w\_2, ..., w\_{n} } is independent, then w\_1, w\_2, ..., w\_{n} is also a basis of V'. i.e. if \dim V = n, \set{ w\_1, w\_2, ..., w\_{n} } linearly independent implies basis.

{{% proof name="" %}}
Let G = \B L = \set{ w\_1, w\_2, ..., w\_{n} } (m = n)
L is linearly independent. G generates V.

exisits H \subseteq G s.t. \abs{H}= n-m=n-n =0
and \spa{L \cup H} = V = V.

This implies that H = \emptyset ( \abs{H}=0 )

and V = \spa{L \cup H} = \spa{L \cup \emptyset}

L is linearly independent and generates V \implies L is a basis.

{{% /proof %}}


1.6 20 $ \dim V = n , S \subseteq V, \spa{ S } = V$

(1) There is a \subset of S that generates V.
(do not assume S is finite)

ex. V = \R, F = \R, S = \Z, S is infinite.

$ L = \set{ 1 } \subseteq S, \spa{ L } = \R $

Objective: find n independent vectors in S. Then corollary finishes the proof choose any u_1 \in S consider W_1 \spa{ u_1 }

Then  w_1 \neq V.

there is another $ u_2 \in S $ s.t. $ u_2 notin \spa{ u_1 }$

Given \set{ u\_1, u\_2, ..., u\_{ m } } where $1 \leq m \leq n-1$ choose u_{m+1} \in S s.t. u_{m+1} \in S s.t. u_{m+1} \notin span{u_1, ..., u_m}.

check \set{ u_1, ..., u_n } is independent.



22. $W_1, W_2 \leq V , \dim V = n $

sufficient condition on $ W_1, W_2 s.t. \dim (W_1 \cap W_2) = \dim W_1$

$ W_1 \subseteq W_2 \iff \dim(w_1 \cap w_2) = \dim W_1$

{{% proof name="$ \implies$" %}}

easy. $ W_1 \cap W_2 $  = W_1 $

{{% /proof %}}

{{% proof name="$\impliedby$" %}}

let $ \dim (w_1 \cap w_2) = m $

(this is finite because dim V finite)

Let $ \B = \set{ u\_1, u\_2, ..., u\_{ m } }$ be a basis of $W_1 \cap W_2$

For each i, $ u_i \in W_1 \cap W_2 $

$ u_1 \in W_1, \B$ is an linearly independent subset of W_i with m many vectors  1

$ dim w_1 = \dim (w_1 \cap W_2) - m $ 2

1 & 2 implies that \B is a basis of W_1 (corollary of replacement then)

u_i \in W_2, \forall i W_2 is a vector space.

\spa{  u\_1, u\_2, ..., u\_{ m } } \leq W_1

{{% /proof %}}

20.b use a

23. $v_1 ~ v_k, v \in V, W_1 = \spa{ v\_1, v\_2, ..., v\_{ k } }, W_2 = \spa{ v\_1, v\_2, ..., v\_{ k }, v }$

(a) \dim W_1 = \dim W_2

\iff v \in \spa{ v\_1, v\_2, ..., v\_{ k } }

\impliedby easy

\implies 1. \dim W_1, \dim W_2, are finite, \because it is generated by finite many vectors
2. Let n = \dim W_1 \dim W_2, choose a basis { u\_1, u\_2, ..., u\_{ n } } of W_1 W_1 = \spa{ u\_1, u\_2, ..., u\_{ n } }

W_1 \leq W_2 (subspace)

\spa{ u\_1, u\_2, ..., u\_{ n } } \leq W_2, subspace

\set{ u\_1, u\_2, ..., u\_{ n } } linearly independent vectors \in W_2

also \dim W_2 = n  \implies \set{ u, n\_1, u, n\_2, ..., u, n\_{  } } is a hosts of W_2


26. a \in \R

$ P_n( \R)  = { f: \R \to \R; f is a polynomial with deg n }$


pf 1. W is a subspace of P_n(R)

2. Let f in W.

f(x) = anxn + ... +a1x+ a0
and f(a) = a_na^n + a_n + ...+ a_1 \cdot a+ a_0 = 0

\dim P_n(R) = n+1

$f(x) = a_nx^n +...+ a_0$

f \in W, f(x) = a_nx^n + ...+ a_0 + 1constraint f(a) -0

find n many linearly independent vectors of W

\set{ x^n-a^n, x^{n-1} - a{n-1}, ..., x-a } 1 \leq 1 \leq n

prove \set{ f_1, ..., f_n } is linearly independent

$W \leq Pn(f), \dim P_n(f) = n+1$

$W \neq Pn(f) \dim W cannot be n +1$

if $ \dim W = n+1 = pn(f) $

w \leq p_n(f)
