---
title: "01. Sets and Probability Models"
date: 2018-06-25T9:03:48+08:00
author: "Jim Zenn"
volumes: ["Math 170A"]
LaTeX: true

---



Probablity origins from uncertainty.

<!--more-->

# Sets

A set is a collection of objects, called <u>elements</u> of the set.

If $S$ is a set, and $x$ is an element of $S$, we write $x \in S$ ($x$ is contained in S)

If $x$ is not an element of $S$, we write $x \notin S$, $x$ not contained in $S$

The set which has no elements is denoted $\emptyset$

If S consists of a finite # of elements say $x_1, ..., x_n$ , we write $S=\\{x_1, ..., x_n\\}$

> The set of instructors in this course is $\\{\text{Olga Turanova}\\}$

<br>

> The set of letters in the name of this course is $\\{P, r, o, b, a, i, l, t, y, h, e\\}$

<br>

> The set of possible outcomes of one coin toss:
>
> $\\{\text{Head}, \text{Tail}\\}$

<br>

> The set of possible outcomes of one coin toss:
>
> $\\{\text{HH}, \text{HT}, \text{TH}, \text{TT}\\}$



If $S$ consists of infinitely many elements which can be enumerated in a list, say $x_1, x_2, ...$, we write $S=\\{x_1, x_2, ...\\}$ & say $S$ is countably infinite.

> $\mathbb{N}=\\{1, 2, 3, ...\\}$ is countably $\infty$
>
> **!** $\mathbb{Q}​$ is countable, although the reason why will not be covered in this class.

If the elements of S cannot be enumerated in a list, S is called <u>uncountable</u>

> the real numbers $\mathbb{R}$, or also $(1, 2)$, are uncountable.



We may want to consider the set $S$ of all $x$ that satisfy a certain property $P$. We write this as $S=\\{x|x\text{ satisfies }P\\}$

> $\\{x|x>0, \frac{x}{2}\in \mathbb{N}\\}={2,4,6,8,...}$

are both ways to describe the set of even natural numbers $S$. 

If every element of S is an element of S is an element of T (another set), we write $S \subset T$ or $T \supset S$ (S is a subset of T)

If $S \subset T $ & $ T \supset S$ then the two sets are equal.

> $S=\\{1, 2\\},$ 
>
> $\\{1, 2\\}\subset S, \\{1,2,3\\}\not\subset S, 1 \in S, \\{1\\} \not\in S$

> $\\{5\\}\in\\{\\{5\\}, 7, \text{cat}\\}$
>
> $\\{5\\} \subset\\{\\{5\\}, 7, \text{cat}\\}$



<u>Set operations</u>, we often introduce a universal set, $\Omega$ containing all objects of interest in a particular context.

The <u>complement</u> of $S$ is: $S^c=\\{x\in\Omega|x\not\in S\\}$.

The <u>union</u> of $S$ & $T$ is: $S\cup T = \\{x\in\Omega|x \in S \text{ or } x \in T\\}$.

The <u>intersection</u> of $S$ & $T$ is: $S\cap T = \\{x\in\Omega|x \in S \text{ and } x \in T\\}$. 

(make sure the use of "or" or "and", do not use comma).

> ${({S^C})^C}=S$

> $S\cap S^C=\emptyset$
>
> $S\cup S^C = \Omega$

<u>Key property</u>, Algebra of sets.

$S\cap(T\cup V)=(S\cap T)\cup(S\cap V)$

<u>Proof sketch</u>:

> Say $x\in S\cap (T \cup V)$
>
> Then $x \in S$ and $x\in T\cup V$ 
>
> which means $x\in S$ and either $x\in T$ or $x \in V$
>
> so $x$ is in either $S\in T$ or $S\cap V$
>
> so $x$ is in their union.

$S\cup(T\cap V)=(S\cup T)\cap(S\cup V)$

<u>De Morgan's Laws</u>, $S_1, S_2,...$ are sets

1. $(\underset{n}{\cup} S_n)^c = \cap S_n^C$
2. $(\underset{n}{\cap} S_n)^c = \cup S_n^C$

# Probability

<u>Probability Models</u>

Def: 

1. A <u>sample space</u> $\Omega$ is a the set of <u>outcomes</u> of an experiment.

2. An <u>event</u> $A$ is a subset of $\Omega$.

To represent the experiment well, $\Omega $ must be "collectively exhaustive", i.e. no mather what happens, <u>outcome</u> is in $\Omega$.

> two coin tosses $\Omega = \\{\text{HH}, \text{TH}, \text{HT}, \text{TT}\\}$
>
> $\text{HH}$ is an outcome,
>
> $\\{\text{HH}, \text{TT}\\}$ is an event, namely "same result on both tosses".

The <u>probability law</u> $P$ assigns to each event $A$ a number, $P(A)$. 

$P(A)$ called "the probability of A" satisfying.

1. non-negativity: $P(A)\geq 0, \forall A$
2. additivity: if $A_1,A_2,...$ are disjoint, $P(A_1\cup A_2 \cup ...)=P(A_1) + P(A_2)+...$
3. normalization: $P(\Omega)=1$

	 one fair coin toss $\Omega=\\{H, T\\}, P(\\{H\\})=P(\\{T\\})=0.5$	

Two sets A,B are disjoint if $A\cap B=\emptyset$,

$A_1, A_2$ are disjoint if $A_i$ and $A_j$ are disjoint $\forall i \neq j$

> Describe one <u>unfair</u> coin toss where chance of H is $\frac{1}{4}$.
>
> $\Omega =\\{\text{H}, \text{T}\\}, P(\\{\text{H}\\})=\frac{1}{4}, P(\\{\text{T}\\})=\frac{3}{4}$
>
> note: $P(\text{H}\cup\text{T}) = 1$